


Comparative Religions Page


  COMPARATIVE RELIGIONS PAGE



  This page is maintained primarily as a resource for and on-going project of the
  "Comparative Religions" course at Milligan College.

  General Resources and Multi-Resource Sites 
 Academic
  Info: Religion  An Annotated Directory of Internet Resources for the Academic
  Study of Religion. 
 Virtual
  Religion Index  A very helpful site maintained at Rutgers University. 
 Facets of
  Religion Part of the WWW Virtual Library
 Finding
  God In Cyberspace (by John Gresham)  A guide to religious studies resources on
  the internet.
 Religion News
  Service  News on religion, ethics, spirituality, and moral issues. 
 WORLD SCRIPTURE
    A Comparative Anthology of Sacred Texts. 
 Adherents.com
  "Adherents.com is a growing collection of over 44,000 adherent statistics and
  religious geography citations -- references to published membership/adherent statistics
  and congregation statistics for over 4,000 religions, churches, denominations, religious
  bodies, faith groups, tribes, cultures, movements, ultimate concerns, etc." 


About.com.  "Although there are several
  different subject areas on the culture page, the one for "Religion/Spirituality"
  is the one that is of great use to our class. The section has a fair, unbiased
  informational approach to more than a dozen different major religious groups in the world
  today, along with some humor and general encouragement. The areas on the different
  religious entities are all fair, balanced, and informative, covering the formation,
  history, primary beliefs, traditions, size, sacred texts and other teaching tools" [Louis Anderson].
 Religious
  Tolerance  "This site sets itself apart from most that one will find on the
  web where religious sites are concerned. This is a site devoted to a nonjudgemental,
  pragmatic approach to dozens of major religions, & pseudo-religions, around the world.
  They make no judgements about any of the organizations they examine, they simply present
  the teachings, history, supporting and problematic "situations" and thoughts for
  each." [Louis Anderson]
 North American
  Interfaith Network "The web site of an organization working to promote
  understanding and discussion among the the various religious traditions within the North
  American landscape.  The site offers links to a large number of religious traditions
  in North America, news on discussion and work among various traditions, and a library of
  essays on interfaith dialogue."  [Wes
  Jamison]
 Interfaith
  Calendar  "This site is one with a different approach to religious study,
  but one which can certainly serve to stimulate the interest of the visitor. This site
  contains calendars for the current year, as well as several years to come, that have the
  "Primary Sacred Times" for many religions around the world. A nice, unique
  approach to introducing students to other religious organizations."  [Louis Anderson]
 The American Religious
  Experience "This website offers an overview of
  the American religious landscape.  Articles and essays examine the role that religion
  has played in shaping American life.  Specific attention is given to the roles of
  women and ethnic minorities in American religious history."
  [Wes Jamison]
 Beliefnet:Spirituality,
  Religion, Morality, Faith, Belief, Community
 Religion,
  Religions, Religious Studies Page 
 Religious
  Resources on the Net 
 Voice
  of the Shuttle: Religious Studies Page 
 Internet
  Resources for Religious Studies 
 Britannica
  Internet Guide: Religion 
 
Specific Traditions

 Primal Traditions 
 Native American Traditions
 Hindu Traditions
 Buddhist Traditions
 Jewish Traditions
 Roman Catholic Traditions
 Orthodox Traditions
 Islamic Traditions
 Other Traditions 




Return to
  Comparative Religions Syllabus | Return to Kenneson Home Page








