


sex and gender syllabus






Course Syllabus
History 410: Sex and Gender in Medieval and Early Modern
Europe
Fall 1998
Professor Jennifer Fisk Rondeau; E-mail jrondeau@darkwing.uoregon.edu
Office: 221 PLC; Office Phone: 346-4821
Office Hours: Tuesdays, 10.00 a.m. to 12.00 noon, or by
appointment

Requirements  | Grading
| Schedule of
Lecture Topics and Assignments | Discussion
Questions | About the Class
Listservs | Guidelines for
Listserv Discussion | Paper Guidelines | Midterm
Guidelines | Final Guidelines


Course Description
This course examines the ways in which people in medieval and
early modern Europe (11th to 16th centuries) understood and made
meaning out of sexual practices and the variety of gender
constructions they (often but not always) produced and were produced
by. We will compare how medieval people wrote about sex and gender --
both explicitly, in medical and legal texts, and implicitly, in
religious and popular vernacular texts -- with the ways we understand
them in the modern world.


Requirements | top of
page

Completion of weekly reading assignments, drawn from the
   following books available for purchase at the bookstore:
   
   
The Letters of Abelard and Heloise
Giovanni Boccaccio, The Decameron
Marguerite de Navarre, The Heptameron
Baldesarre Castiglione, The Book of the Courtier
and from a selection of volumes available on reserve in
      Knight Library.


Class attendance and participation. Class meetings will
   typically consist of a combination of lecture on background
   material and discussion of the reading assignments in the primary
   sources.
Participation in an archived listserv discussion. You will
   choose one week's topic/s on which you will be required to post a
   brief summary and critical analysis of the week's readings,
   together with some supplemental bibliography which you will
   develop in consultation with the professor. This supplemental
   bibliography will also be posted, both to the list and to the
   course webpage. Every member of the class is responsible for
   posting at least one substantial response to this initial
   discussion each week. Please see Guidelines
   for Listserv Discussion for further description of this
   assignment.
A midterm and a final examination, to be held on dates
   specified in the schedule below. The midterm examination will ask
   you to write one, the final examination two, comparative or
   analytical essay questions from a selection of topics drawn from
   lectures, readings, and on-line and in-class discussions. See
   Midterm Guidelines,
   Final Guidelines for more
   details.
A 12-15 page paper based on your own research and readings in
   the primary sources, due at the end of the term. You will also
   present a summary of your bibliography and research for this paper
   to the class during the week for which your topic is most
   relevant. In most cases, your paper topic should be based on the
   topic for which you develop bibliography and an on-line discussion
   question, but other options are certainly available. YOU MUST
   CONSULT WITH THE PROFESSOR BEFORE UNDERTAKING EITHER THIS
   ASSIGNMENT OR YOUR ON-LINE ASSIGNMENT. See Paper
   Guidelines for more details.



Grading | top
of page

Participation in weekly discussions (includes both class time
   and on-line discussion): 25%
Midterm Examination: 30%
Final Paper and Class Presentation: 45%



Schedule of Lecture Topics and Assignments | top
of page

Reading assignments available on reserve are indicated with an
asterisk (*).

WEEK I. Introductions practical and theoretical. Sex and gender, now
and then.

Reading assignment: *Joan Scott, "Gender: A Useful Category of
   Historical Analysis," in Gender and the Politics of
   History; *Judith Butler, "Contingent Foundations: Feminism and
   the Question of 'Postmodernism'," in Butler and Scott, eds.,
   Feminists Theorize the Political; *"Introduction" to
   Constructing Medieval Sexuality, ed. Lochrie, McCracken,
   and Schultz; *Lyndal Roper, "Introduction" to Oedipus and the
   Devil: Witchcraft, Sexuality and the Devil in Early Modern
   Europe

Monday, September 28: Introduction to the Course. Course
Materials on the Web. Discussion Lists.
Wednesday, September 30: Lecture/Discussion. What is sex? What
is gender?
Friday, October 2: Discussion.
Sex and gender theory


WEEK II. Marriage: what difference does sex make?

Reading assignment: The
   Letters of Abelard and Heloise, pp. 57-156; *canon
   law texts (available on disk and in printed form); *Brooke, The
   Medieval Idea of Marriage, pp. 61-118, and browse

 Monday, October 5: Marriage
and theology
Wednesday, October 7: Marriage
and canon law
Friday, October 9: Discussion. Marriage,
sex, gender, and past lives


WEEK III. Marriage: what difference does gender make?

Reading assignment: Boccaccio, The Decameron (I
   give the assignment by day and tale, rather than page number, so
   that you can use different editions if you wish): Day 2, tales 3,
   6-7, 9-10; Day 4, tales 6, 8-9; Day 5, tales 7, 10; Day 7, as many
   tales as you can manage -- they are all variations on a theme; Day
   8, tale 8, Day 10, tale 10; *Howell, The Marriage Exchange,
   pages to be assigned; *Herlihy and Klapisch, Tuscans and
   their Families, 202-31, 337-60; *Klapisch, Women, Family,
   and Ritual, 117-31, 178-212; *Sheehan, Marriage, Family,
   and Law in Medieval Europe, pp. 16-37, 87-117, 247-98; John
   Baldwin in Consent and Coercion to Sex and Marriage, pp.
   257-70

 Monday, October 12: Medieval
marriage: gender and social practice
Wednesday, October 14: Marriage
for men, marriage for women? stereotypes and the exercise of
power
Friday, October 16: Discussion. Stereotypes and
"realities"


WEEK IV. Sex and sexuality: the literary sources

Reading assignment: The Lais of Marie de France: Guigemar,
   Le Fresne, Bisclavret, Lanval, Chevrefoil, Eliduc; Chretien de
   Troyes, Romances: Erec et Enide; Andreas Capellanus, The
   Art of Courtly Love, Book I; Cadden, The Meanings of Sex
   Difference; Jacquaert and Thomasset, Sexuality and medicine
   in the Middle Ages

 Monday, October 19: Sex
and stereotypes
Wednesday, October 21: The Literary
Sources: sexuality/sexualities and the erotic
Friday, October 23: Discussion.
Gendered literature, literary sex


WEEK V. Sex and sexuality: the social and legal sources

Reading assignment: John Boswell; Michael Rocke; materials on
   rape

 Monday, October 26
Wednesday, October 28
Friday, October 30
MIDTERM
EXAMINATION ON LINE THURSDAY, OCTOBER 29


WEEK VI. Gender, literary models, and social roles outside
marriage I: men and masculinity

Reading assignment: The Lais of Marie de France,
   review; *Boccaccio and Bruni, Lives of Dante;
   Castiglione, The Book of the Courtier, Book 1; *Medieval
   Masculinities, Chojnacki article and browse; *Thompson and
   Nagel, Three Crowns of Florence, browse

Monday, November 2: Sex and masculinity
Wednesday, November 4: Men, families, and courts
Friday, November 6: Discussion: sex, society, and
masculinity

MIDTERM
EXAMINATION DUE IN CLASS FRIDAY, NOVEMBER 6


WEEK VII. Gender, literary models, and social roles outside marriage
II: women and femininity

Reading Assignment: Boccaccio, Concerning Famous Women;
   Chaucer; Christine de Pizan on Joan of Arc; Castiglione, The
   Book of the Courtier, Book 3 and Bembo on love in Book 4

 Monday, November 9: Where are women outside marriage?
Sex and the same old story?
Wednesday, November 11: Politics, work, and writing
Friday, November 13: What do all those "famous" women do?


WEEK VIII. Sex, gender, and spirituality: men's and women's
writings

Reading Assignment: *Bernard of Clairvaux, Sermons on the
   Song of Songs, browse in any volume; *The Little Flowers of
   Saint Francis, browse (try to get 1925 or 1950 edition);
*Dronke, Women Writers of the Middle Ages, chs. 1 and
   6; *Angela of Foligno, Complete Works, pp. 123-218 (her
   Memorial)

 Monday, November 16: Gender ideology and intellectual
history; Religious life in the Middle Ages
Wednesday, November 18: Spiritual themes in men's and women's
writings
Friday, November 20: Discussion: gender and spirituality


WEEK IX. Sex, gender, and spirituality: women's lives and
writings

Reading Assignment: *Catherine of Siena, Letters;
   *Julian of Norwich, Revelations (Showings)

Monday, November 23
Wednesday, November 25
THANKSGIVING HOLIDAY THURSDAY AND FRIDAY, NOVEMBER 26-27. CLASS DOES
NOT MEET.


WEEK X. Sex, gender, and society transformed (?)

Reading Assignment: Marguerite de Navarre, The
   Heptameron

Monday, November 30
Wednesday, December 2
Friday, December 4 


Discussion Questions | top
of page
This link is a short-cut to the pages containing
questions to help you prepare for class and on line discussion. You
may follow the links from here or from the schedule of weekly reading
assignments.

Scott, Roper, Butler for Week
I
The Letters of Abelard and
Heloise
The Decameron


About the Class Listservs | top
of page
The listserv component of the course has several purposes. The most
basic one is to supplement and complement the in class discusssions
of course materials and theoretical issues. The second is to allow
for broader discussion of some of the issues and of more materials
than we can cover during class meetings. The third is to allow you to
share the process of your research with your classmates, and to learn
from and help one another in that process. If you are not familiar
with listservs, don't worry about it. We will go over the list in
class, resources to help you are widely available on campus, and your
instructor and fellow students can also help out. Please see the
separate page Guidelines for
Listserv Discussion for more details.


