





Sex and Gender Syllabus


The
Sociology of Sex and Gender
Spring 2000 - V93.0021.002
Tuesday/Thursday
3:30-4:45
http://www.nyu.edu/classes/bessett/





Ms. Danielle Bessett                                                     
Office Hours:
269 Mercer Street, Room 436                                          
Thursdays 5-6pm ABA
Phone #998-8371                                                  

bessett@mail.soc.nyu.edu
 
This course is an introduction to the sociology of sex and gender. We
will explore the ways in which gender is built into the structures, institutions,
and ideologies of social life in the contemporary United States and how
different groups of men and women experience and practice gender. In so
doing, we will examine the operations of key "gender regimes," including
the state, the workplace, the family and mass media, as well as the actions
and responses of social actors.
We will analyze various forms of gender inequality where they exist,
as well as attempts to explain them theoretically. This is not a survey
of feminism, the feminist movement, or feminist thought. But much of the
best work in the sociology of gender is that of feminist thinkers, and
a comprehension of these and other varieties of theoretical perspectives
is essential. Significant emphasis will be placed not only on the substantive
nature of the material, but also on the perspective of the author.
In addition, this course emphasizes sociological methodology. Each of
you will undertake field work focused on gender and social change - an
opportunity to "do" social research in this subfield - and we will pay
particular attention to the methodologies employed in the texts assigned
for class.
Course Requirements:
You are expected to attend class with the readings completed. Be careful
not to fall behind. Late papers will be penalized, and no make-up exams
or presentations will be permitted without a legitimate excuse (i.e., documented
life-threatening illness requiring hospitalization) in advance of the deadline.
Thoughtful and constructive class participation will be taken into account
in the calculation of final grades. All written work must be your
own!
Every other week you will be required to hand in a one page write-up
of what you find to be most interesting, insightful, problematic, etc.
in the readings assigned for that day's class no later than noon on
the day of class. I prefer these write-ups be in electronic format
- via email or disk - and you are responsible for their safe arrival. These
one page write-ups will be graded, and, taken together, they will constitute
approximately 25% of your overall grade in the course. If you fail to hand
in a write-up by the 12:00 deadline for any particular week, you'll receive
an "F." No exceptions.  Connect to these memos on the web here.
There will be a take-home midterm exam and
a take-home final exam. The exams will consist
of essay questions that draw on issues raised in the readings and class
discussion. I will expect that your exams will display your sparkling analytical
thought rather than mere description, and I will grade accordingly. Each
exam will count for approximately 25% of your overall grade.
As noted above, you will also design and execute your own exploratory
research
project. A complete description of this project is available on the
course website. You will be required to submit a proposal, outlining the
research that already exists on your topic, your intended research design,
and human subjects concerns, in February. All research projects are subject
to Sociology Department guidelines and my approval! You will present your
findings in a research paper and in class. These three components of the
research project (proposal, paper, and presentation) will comprise approximately
25% of your final grade.
The course website has several features to help you prepare for class.
Reading questions are provided for each assigned text, and a short quiz
is available for each section to help you test your understanding. Just
click on the links contained within the online syllabus. If you know of
(or find) related outside links that might be of interest to the class,
let me know and I'll add them to the site.
Required Texts:
All required books are available for purchase at the NYU bookstore.
While all are worth purchasing, some are quite expensive - you may want
to consider photocopying the assigned sections from (GP) and (FF) rather
than buying the book since we won't be reading the entire book. Be aware
of the edition you are purchasing, especially if you are looking for used
copies of these books. NB: In some cases, I have assigned parts of chapters,
so save yourself some work by checking the page numbers!
(GP) R.W. Connell, Gender and Power
(SS) Arlie Hochschild, The Second Shift
(SG) Peggy Orenstein, Schoolgirls
(FF) Laurel Richardson, Verta Taylor, and Nancy Whittier, Feminist
Frontiers IV
(BW) Judith Rollins, Between Women
Readings designated with an (R) on the course outline below can be purchased
at New University Copy on Waverly Place between Mercer and Greene streets.
Additional readings will be assigned to complement student presentations
in April.
All materials are on reserve in Bobst library.
 
 



Course Outline
The course schedule that follows may be revised as the course progresses
- check back periodically to make sure you have the most current version.
Introduction
1/18
Discussion of syllabus and course requirements
Analyzing
Gender and Inequality: Structures and Practice
1/20
FF: Lorber, "Night to His Day: The Social Production of Gender" (pp.33-47)
Connell, "Hegemonic Masculinity and Emphasized Femininity" (pp. 22-25)
1/25 - Handout on Gender Theory!
GP Connell, "Preface," "Introduction: Some Facts in the Case," "Sex
Role Theory," and "The Knot of Natural Difference" (pp. ix-xiv, 1-20, 47-54,
66-77)
1/27
GP Connell, "Main Structures: Labour, Power, Cathexis" and "Gender
Regimes and the Gender Order" (pp.91-142)
The
State: Welfare as a Gendered Structure
2/1
R: Abramovitz, "Under Attack: Women and Welfare Reform Today" and "the
Gendered Welfare State" (pp.13-48; 83-108)
2/3
R: Sidel, "The Enemy Within" and "Targeting Welfare Recipients" (pp.1-32;81-115)
Paid
Employment: Perspectives on Gender and Capitalism
2/8
FILM: Rosie the Riveter
FF: Kessler-Harris, "The Wage Conceived: Value and Need as Measures
of Women's Worth" (pp. 201-14)
R: Bernard, "The Good Provider Role: Its Rise and Fall" (pp.203-220)
2/10
FF: Reskin, "Bringing the Men Back In: Sex Differentiation and the
Devaluation of Women's Work" (pp. 215-28)
R: Williams, "Glass Escalator: Hidden Advantages for Men in the 'Female
Professions'" (pp.285-299)
2/15
FF: Leidner, "Serving Hamburgers and Selling Insurance: Gender, Work,
and Identity in Interactive Service Jobs" (pp.234-46)
2/17
BW: Rollins, Between Women (pp. 5-59)
(Discussion of Research Methodologies for Research Proposals)
2/22
Research Proposals Due
BW: Rollins, Between Women (pp. 63-232)
Intimacy
and the Family
2/24
FF: Chodorow, "Family Structure and Feminine Personality" (pp. 145-60)
R: Collins, "Work, Family, and Black Women's Oppression" (pp.43-66)
2/29
SS: Hochschild, The Second Shift
3/2
Midterm Exam Handed Out
R: Coontz, "Working With What We've Got: The Strengths and Vulnerabilities
of Today's Families" (pp.157-177)
Education
3/7
SG: Orenstein, Schoolgirls
3/9
R: Messner, "Boyhood, Organized Sports, and the Construction of Masculinities"
(pp.109-121)
FF: Martin and Hummer, "Fraternities and Rape on Campus" (pp. 398-409)

* * * * * Spring Break * * * * *
Sexuality,
Media and the Body
3/21
Midterm Exam Due
FF: Rich, "Compulsory Heterosexuality and Lesbian Existence" (pp. 81-100)
R: Almaguer, "Chicano Men" (pp.473-486)
3/23
FF: Tolman, "Doing Desire: Adolescent Girls' Struggles for/with Sexuality"
(pp.337-49)
3/28
R: Fausto-Sterling, "How to Build a Man" (pp.385-389)
Tiefer, "In Pursuit of the Perfect Penis" (pp.165-184)
3/30
R: Bordo, "Feminism, Western Culture, and the Body" and Bordo, "Material
Girl: Effacements of Postmodern Culture" (pp.1-42; 245-275)
4/4
Bring a recent magazine to class!
R: Faludi, "The 'Trends' of Antifeminism: The Media and The Backlash"
(pp. 75-82; 95-104)
4/6
Representations of Gender in Contemporary Television
R: Boal, "Women are Easy" (pp.41-2)
Student
Research Mini-Conference
4/11
Research Papers Due
Presentations
4/13
Presentations
4/18
Presentations
4/20
Presentations
4/25
Presentations
FF: S, Faludi, "I'm not a Feminist, but I Play One on TV" (p.518);
M. Kimmel, "Judaism, Masculinity, and Feminism" (p.530); b. hooks "Black
Students who Reject Feminism" (p.546); A. Lorde, "The Master's Tools Will
Never Dismantle the Master's House" (pp.26-27).
 
4/27
Review, Course Evaluations
5/4
Final Exam Due
 
Back to Sex and Gender
Homepage
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


