

Race, Ethnicity in Crime and Social Justice course online







Take your Race, Ethnicity in Crime and Social Justice course online today!
Home / FAQs / Online Degrees / Certificate Courses / Admission Policies / Class Rooms / Request Info.
Canyon College

CJ580: Race, Ethnicity in Crime and Social Justice
SYLLABUS
Instructor: Prof. Michael L. Beshears



Office hours: Online Course
Instructor email: beshears@canyoncollege.edu
Textbook: Multicultural Law Enforcement, Second Edition (2002) by R. Shusta, D. 
Levine, P. Harris, H. Wong. NJ: Prentice-Hall, ISBN 013033409X.



 Online Bookstore



Course Description

This course analyzes the relationships between race, ethnicity, and crime in the justice system, 
and the effect that social policy has on racial and ethnic inequality. The theories of ethnic 
and racial justice are also presented in relationship to their effect on crime and criminal 
justice.

Extensive readings, cases, briefs, and Internet resources focus on the issues of cultural 
sensitivity, privilege, intimidation, flashpoint encounters, and the influence of prejudice on
organizations and people. Community policing is also covered for how it can be configured 
to incorporate changing for diversity. Law enforcement is used only as an example of how 
multiculturalism can impact public service agencies. Student participation is expected via email, 
bulletin board forums, and online quizzes.

This course requires a working familiarity with computers, possession of a personal computer, 
an Internet connection, and an email account. By registering for this course, students are
expected to have their own equipment, access, and proficiency to browse the Internet, send and 
receive emails, attach documents (Microsoft Word required-Microsoft Works is not sufficient) to 
emails, and participate in-group discussions. There is no face-to-face contact in this course.
Learning Objectives:

To obtain familiarity with the legal, ethical, and practical aspects of cross-cultural 
contacts
To appreciate the impacts of diversity and multiculturalism on the justice system and 
society
To gain a practical understanding of how police agencies can respond both internally and 
externally to demographic changes
To gain insights into the theories and frameworks for understanding how prejudice and 
discrimination affect organizations and individuals
Attendance and Participation:

Students are expected to be mature enough to discipline themselves and know
when they are having attendance problems. They are expected to check in
initially and weekly by email after the course starts.  There is a week's
deadline for all course requirements, and not doing weekly assignments (as
explained on the course schedule) promptly results in recording of a virtual
absence point. Online Exams: (50% of grade)
Exams are a fairly important part of this course. There will be two major
exams: a midterm and a final with 1 or 2 announced online quizzes, which count
as the other (50% of your grade).
Grading System: All assignments are given a letter grade with the following scale 
applied:




A = 94


A- = 91


B+ = 88




B = 83


B- = 80


C+ = 77



C = 74


C- = 70


D+ = 66




D = 61


F = 57 or less






Lecture List CJ580 and 8 Week Course Schedule
Note:Lecture numbers below do not necessarily correlate with the assigned reading 
chapter assignment number e.g., chapter 5 may not go with lecture 5 listed below. Therefore,
scroll to the bottom of this page to see the course schedule to know, which lecture listed 
below is to be read during the week or that corresponds with the assigned weekly reading. Click 
on the lecture below to be taken to that specific lecture.
LECTURES:

The Definition and Meaning of Prejudice
Overview Physical Anthropology & Black History
Discrimination Law
Agency Racism/Oversight/Regulation
Hate Crimes & Their Enforcement
The Role of Community Policing
Social Class and Community Analysis
Understanding Discrimination against Gays and Lesbians
Understanding Discrimination against Immigrants
Illegal Immigration and Crime
Understanding Discrimination against Asian Americans
Understanding Discrimination against African Americans
Understanding Discrimination against Hispanic/Latino Americans
Understanding Discrimination against Arab Americans
Understanding Discrimination against Indigenous Peoples/Native Americans
Ageism and Age Discrimination
10 Most Important Events in Black History
8-Week Course Calendar:



Week One


Definitions & Explanations of Prejudice, History of Official Discrimination, Law, Hate 
Crime, Bias Crime


Read: Shusta ch 1-3 and Online Lectures 1-4
Take Online Practice Quiz




Week Two


Oppression of Difference
Critical Race Theory
Intersections of Race/Class/Gender


Read: Shusta chs 4-5 and chs 11-13 and Online
Lectures 4-5
Take Online Quiz 1




Week Three


Cultural Sensitivity, Semantics, Semiotics,
Language Barriers


Read: Shusta ch 14-15 and Online Lectures 6-7




Week Four


Contacts with Specific Groups- Sex and Gender MIDTERM EXAM


Read: Online Lectures 8-10




Week Five


Contacts with Specific Groups - African- & Asian- Americans


Read: Shusta chs 6-7 and Online Lectures 11-12




Week Six


Contacts with Specific Groups - Latino/Hispanic Americans


Read: Shusta ch 8 and Online Lecture 13
Take Online Quiz 2




Week Seven


Contacts with Specific Groups - Arab & Middle Eastern Americans


Read: Shusta ch 9 and Online Lecture 14




Week Eight


Contacts with Specific Groups - Native Americans FINAL EXAM


Read: Shusta ch 10 and Online Lectures 15-16



MORE ABOUT ONLINE COURSES

DO NOT PRINT OUT all or most of the online lectures and other materials at the instructor's 
website. They are intended to be read online or downloaded to a PDA. What I have posted on the
Internet is essentially an e-book, totaling over 1GB in file size. They are often updated, so it 
does little good to print them all out in advance and put them in a binder. It is also foolish 
to try and print out all the content at the hyperlinks to external sites at the bottom of each 
lecture. You'd be printing for days. I will try to announce content updates and changes 
as they happen, but the preferred method for reading in this course is online, taking advantage 
of all the embedded hyperlinks, dynamic Internet resources, Javascript applets, and other 
interactive media that is typical of an online course. Please make a habit of hitting the 
Refresh or Reload icon on your web browser to make sure you are viewing the latest version of a 
page at this site, or set your browser settings to refresh automatically. You definitely need to 
know how to Refresh a page's content to make sure you're looking at the most recent version of a 
post.

The ideal student in a web-based course will have the following characteristics:


They will be independent learners, capable of looking at problems critically and finding 
solutions to them with a minimum of assistance.
They will be disinclined to procrastinate. Anyone who gets behind in their work in a web-
based course will find it very difficult to catch up.
They will be computer literate, and able to negotiate problems with their computer hardware 
and software as well as network connection when they occur. They will need very little hand 
holding in this area.
They will have sufficient time to devote to the course and its requirements, although that 
time may involve unconventional or irregular intervals.
They will have good communication skills, so that inquiries to the instructor will be 
specific and not require clarification and inevitable delay to obtain an answer.
They will be able to take advantage of the research resources available to them via the 
Internet and whatever library they may have access to.

Quizzes and exams will not be proctored, but require entering the login and password given the 
student by the main campus. You are on your honor that you, and only you, are the one taking the
course and taking the exams. Security login names and passwords assigned to individual students 
may change throughout the course, or other methods may be used to ensure honesty. Only a small 
number of answers can be looked up in the lectures because students will find that, even with 
the help of sample exams, online quizzes and exams are extremely difficult and require 
going beyond memorization.


