Courses Taught by Jack Miller

Jack Miller
Curriculum Vitae
1996-98
Central Washington University










winter 1998 | 

autumn 1997 | 

summer 1997 | 

autumn 1996


1995
Babes-Boylai University, Cluj-Napoca, Romania
The Development of Liberal-Democratic Theory
This course traces the various debates surrounding the functioning of the modern, Liberal state, beginning with its origins in the Hobbes/Locke debate and ending with the contemporary debate between Rawls and Nozick. There will is an attempt to understand the basic terms of the debate in each of its stages and to see how Liberal Democratic Theory has developed into the current debate over redistribution and property rights. Syllabus with topics and readings (links to those available on-line). Spring 1995
Theory and Phenomenology of Political Power
This course explores the various areas in which political power is exercised, from direct social control by the state to how power circulates in architectural structures, the production of knowledge, and the ordering of familiar social forms like the family. The central problematic that we consider is the mechanisms by which power is utilized to coordinate social cooperation, immunize society from change, and protect the established interests of various elites. Syllabus with topics and readings (links to the few available on-line). Autumn 1995

1992-94
University of Washington &
Central Washington University
Pre-Modern Political Thought
The 16th and 17th centuries in Europe witnessed a disintegration of the Medieval social/political/metaphysical order: the Reformation attack on the authority of the Church, the Parliamentarian attack on the monarchy, the Copernican attack on the geocentric cosmology, and the Cartesian-Newtonian attack on the Aristotlean and scholastic philosophies.  The purpose of this course is to study some of the transformations in Western thought that occured during these two important centuries.  We focus on the new problems raised by the pre-moderns and attempt to understand how their answers to these new problems laid the foundations for the "modern" age of Enlightenment, Capitalism, and Democracy.  We are particularly concerned to track the development of the cornerstone of modern political philosophy:  the sovereign, rational individual. Syllabus with topics and readings (links to the few available on-line). Spring 1994
Public Law
The "legal system" occupies and defines a large part of modern life - laws, contracts, lawyers,
regulations, etc. are a part of almost every activity we engage in. The purpose of this course will be
to understand not only how the legal system works but h ow the system developed, how it is
justified, how it effects people, and what is wrong with it. Our inquiry will take us into the history, the
practice, and the theory of the American legal system, and we will read works in social science,
philosophy, and history. Syllabus with topics and readings. Winter 1993
Introduction to Political Theory: Social Criticism
One of the central features of political theory is the critique of the institutions, practices, and discourses that define and shape society and an individual's place within it.  This course is an attempt to teach students the fine art of social criticism through a careful examination of the ideas of two of the most prominent social critics of the last 200 years - Jean-Jacques Rousseau and Friedrich Nietzsche.  We concentrate on learning what they can teach us about the style and method of social criticism as well as look for ways in which their critiques are still relevant (perhaps even more so) in our society.  The ultimate purpose of this course is to enable students to intelligently, philosophically, and rigorously critique American society of the late 20th century in order to be more aware, informed members of that society. Syllabus with topics, readings (links to the few available on-line), and exam questions. Summer 1993
Constitutional Law
In the course of ruling on the constitutionality of state and federal legislation, the United States Supreme Court creates certain doctrines and rules that function in roughly the same way as laws - guiding and proscribing the behavior of both public officials (police, legislators, and judges) and private citizens.  In this course we study the rulings that have announced and elaborated on these doctrines and rules.  The emphasis will be on learning how these cases are prepared and what impact they have on our lives and on future cases before the Court. Syllabus with topics and readings, Exam Questions (with a sample answer). Spring 1993
Introduction to Political Theory
The subject of this course is freedom.  During the term, we explore the different conceptions of freedom put forth by John Locke, Immanuel Kant, Jean-Jacques Rousseau and Georg Wilhem Friedrich Hegel.  In order to fully understand their views on freedom, we read both the works that deal directly with the issue of freedom and the works that provide philosophical support for their conceptions of freedom.  As such, we cover topics in epistemology (the study of knowledge), metaphysics, and education as well as political philosophy. Syllabus with topics, readings (links to the few available on-line), and exam questions. Summer 1992

