


Fate of the Twentieth Century Syllabus



The Fate of the Twentieth Century
Spring 1998 Syllabus
Lectures Wednesday and Friday 1:00 - 2:00 P.M. - 112 Gregory
Hall
Narrator: 
Peter Fritzsche pfritzsc@uiuc.edu 300A Gregory
Hall 
Office Hours: Wednesday, 2:00-3:00 and by appointment 
Teaching Assistants 


Bryan Ganaway  
ganaway@uiuc.edu  
437A Gregory Hall
Derek Shouba  
shouba@uiuc.edu  
437A Gregory Hall
Tom Trice  
t-trice@uiuc.edu  
437 Gregory Hall




This course on the "Fate of the Twentieth Century" emerges
out of a year-long history faculty seminar (AY 95/96) sponsored by NEH,
in which eighteen faculty members studied the meaning and main processes
by which they felt the century would be remembered. By turning that seminar
into a lecture course the department is offering students the views of
seventeen experts on the seminal events and changes of the past 100 years
and an opportunity to find and argue their own interpretation of what the
century has left us. Warning: this is not a narrative history of
twentieth-century world history. Please drop this course if you
want that. This is a compilation of multiple different and sometimes contradictory
"takes" on the century; making sense of this approach is one
of your responsibilities as a class member. 
Required Books available in all the bookstores: 

The guiding textbook is Eric Hobsbawm'sThe Age of Extremes
.  It has a clear point, is well written, but is unfortunately not comprehensive.  If you desire more orientation you should also see Michael Adas et al, eds.,  Turbulent Passage. 
Charles Stewart and Peter Fritzsche (eds.) Imagining the Twentieth Century
the scrapbook that emerged out of the faculty seminar.
In addition, we will have two novels, a travel report, and a memoir that can be understood as documents of the twentieth century:

Mongo Beti
The Poor Christ of Bomba (Heinemann) 
John
Scott Behind the Urals 
Bharati
Mucherjee Jasmine 
Erich
Maria Remarque All Quiet on the Western Front  And we will see two movies,  The Battle of Algiers and  Apocalypse Now.  Viewing times to be announced.

Licenses to Interpret
Each student will receive in their first discussion section a "license
to interpret" which assigns them to one of the five principal interpretations
by which our experts have framed the century. These"liceses"
will be assigned by alphabetic order of last names and they will define
the main arguments license holders will seek in readings, assingments,
lectures, and discussion sections for the first half of the course (up
to the mid-term). Licenses must be brought to each lecture and they will
be periodically checked for attendance; they must be presented at the mid-term
and the final exam. The licenses are design as "takes" on the
century to help the class evaluate what is distinctive or new in the century
and what kinds of processes have motored change throughout the century;
they are not complete interpretations of everything in the century. Thus,
no one interpretation cancels out another. While students must engage the
interpretive issues indicated by your license, they may, in the end, not
agree with their centrality. Class discussions will be guided by the interpretative
themes and studies will be expected to move beyond their license. In other
words, the liceses exist to spur, not to delimit discussions. 
"Licenses to interpret" will be 
(a)In what ways was the 20th Century the Century of the State?
The nation-state emerged as humankind's most effective political and cultural
expression and spread globally to provide values and standards for global
human relationships and economic exchange. The nation-state has become
the most important social formation and the most important social allegiance
of the twentieth century. 
(Last names A-D) 
(b) In what ways was the 20th Century the Century of Mobilization?
The growing politicization and increasing mobilization of common folk across
the globe, the self-enfranchisemnt of the formerly disenfranchised, and
the economic empowerment of labor is what most distinguishes this century.
The political mobilization of people according to any number of social,
ethnic, class, and gender identities has most distinguished the twentieth
century. 
(Last names E-J) 
(c) In what ways was the 20th Century the Century of Markets and
Technology? From the "second industrial revolution" of
the 1890's to today's mass markets for electronic gear in remote parts
of the Third World, the driving economic force that has shrunk the globe
has been the expansion of commerce and the development of new technologies
in communications, medicine, energy, and war. 
(Last names K-L) 
(d) In what ways was the 20th Century the Century of Global Culture?
As the centruy began, Western cultural forms came to expert a global hegemony
over communities and groups. War and commerce accelerated the domination
of the West. In the second half of the century, movements of ideas, goods,
and people around the world have fashioned an emerging transitional culture
in which national and state boundaries matter less and less. This process
was the most significant development in the century. 
(Last names M-R) 
(e) In what ways was the 20th Century the Century of the Individual?
The century began with strong notions of loyalty to family and clan, tribe
and ethnicity the world over, the century has closed off with a glorification
of the individual, a post-modern assertion of personal values and responsibility
and an atomization of competing forms of social allegiance and economic
obligation. 
(Last names S-Z) 
Assignments and Gradings:
Attendance 
The format of this course demands attendance of lectures and discussion
sections. You will be required to reconstruct and evaluate ideas from the
lectures in essays and exams. Unlike other courses, however, you will see
and hear most lecturers only once. The many faces and voices you will experience
in History 212 this semester not only increase the value of this course,
but also its pace. You will be able to keep up only if you attend every
class meeting. 
To emphasize the importance of class attendance and keeping up, recorded
absences from three meetings will drop your course grade by one-half grade,
six meetings will drop your course grade by one full mark, etc. For each
day an assignment is overdue it counts as an absence from class. 
Course information and discussion/feedback 
Reading assignments are listed with the lecture topics (which wll not always
exactly correspond to the readings); two required feature films are scheduled,
both of which are available on video in the event you cannot come to the
evening screening times. 
While the exact nature of the assignments have yet to be determined and the due dates may change, the course grade will be determined by the following (assignment sheets will be distributed in your discussion sections):
a) An interview with your oldest-surviving family-member on the events
and accomplishments and failures they judge of greatest importance in the
twentieth century (4-5 page essay, due week of Feb. 8th) [15%; Assignment
Sheet] 
b)An essay that argues for one of the licenses as it can be used to
demonstrate the historical messages from two of the following three assigned
works (Poor Christ of Bomba, All Quiet on the Western Front, or Behind the Urals
). (5 pages, due the week of March 8) [15%; Assignment
Sheet] 
c) A mid-term examination based on text and lecture material.[15%] 
d) A small essay to be assigned (due week of April 26). [10%]
e) Final examination (cumulative: essay format plus identifications)
[20%] 
f) Discussion section participation (discussions, quizzes, in-class assignments, debates, etc.  TAs will inform you of the weighting of these components). [25%]
By participation, we mean coming to class with a
good understanding of the week's lectures and assignments and a willingness
to voice ideas and questions that arise from your reading. Attending class
without speaking will result in a below average (i.e. D or grade) in participation.

Criteria for grading essay work 

  
A = An essay that reads easily, is well organized and demonstrates
the author's familiarity with the main arguments/interpretations found
in the literature and with convincing data, examples, illustrations, episodes,
personalites, etc. that are used to 'document' the main arguments/interpretations.
B = An essay in which an overall organization is apparent and
is neatly presented but where arguments or data are incompatible (or not
an accurate reflection of the literature on the subject) or in which arguments
are set out without adequate proof, or in which relevant data is summarized
extremely well but without arguments being adequate.
C = an essay written without any clear organizing principles
and/or in which the author may either present only some of the arguments
or some of the data and in which the author demonstrates a familiarity
with the literature on the subject.
D = an essay that does not answer the set question, offers a
version of lecture notes only, does not provide 'data' to support points
made and is generally difficult to follow.
F = an essay that does not answer a set question, does not reflect
a comprehension of the issues or arguments under discussion, and does not
reflect the author's understanding of lecture material presented on the
subject or readings.

The Department of History adheres to the guidelines on academic integrity
contained in the Code on Campus Affairs and Handbook of Policies and
Regulations Applying to All Students. Cheating and plagiarism will
be penalized in accord with the penalties and procedures indicated in the
Code on Campus Affairs. All students are responsible for familiarizing
themselves with the definition of these infractions of academic integrity.
Copies of the Code on Academic Affairs can be consulted in the offices
of the History Department and may also be obtained at the Illini Union
information desk. 


Lecture and reading schedule


1/20
Stewart &  
Fritzsche
Introduction. "What is the Twentieth Century?"

"Whose Century is it?"


1/22
Fritzsche
Eric Hobsbawm's Twentieth Century  (The more of Hobsbawm you can read, the better off you will be, but certainly read pp. 1-17)
  1/23  - 1/24 weekend Reading: The Poor Christ of Bomba

1/27
Stewart
Spirit of the Age - 1890-1920  
"Prelude to Contemporary History"  
 "History of the Future"  "Merry-Go-Round" in  Imagining the Twentieth Century, pp. 21, 23


1/27
Arnstein
The role of the Nation-State in the Twentieth Century 
"Redrawing the Globe"  Imaginingthe Twentieth Century, p. 132


1/30
- 1/31
weekend reading:  All Quiet on the Western Front


2/3
McKay
Imperialism, Industrialization, and the West 
 "World's Fair",  "First Car"  Imagining the Twentieth Century, 
pp. 55, 17


2/5
Lynn
World War I as Turning Point in the Century  
"Disillusions" Imagining the Twentieth Century, p. 25  Age of Extremes, pp. 21-53


week of 2/8
first assignment due in section


2/10
Stewart
Creations of the"other"; The Exotic as the Ideological foundation for Economic Empire  
 "Imperialism"  "Icons of Empire"
 "Anachronism" Imagining the Twentieth Centurypp. 29, 83, 15


2/12
Fritzsche
Spirit of the Age - 1920-1950  
Treasure and Trauma of Modernism  
The Age of Extremes, pp. 54-84, 178-98


2/13 - 2/14
weekend reading: Behind the Urals


2/17
Koenker
The Russian Revolution and World Communism  
"Lenin's Light Bulb" Imagining the Twentieth Century, p. 30


2/19
Barrett
The International Left in the 20th Century  
The Age of Extremes, pp. 109-41 "The Spanish Civil War", "No Work"  Imagining the Twentieth Century, pp. 47, 49.


2/26
Fritzsche
The Machine Age  
The Age of Extremes, pp. 85-108 "Machines & Work"  Imagining the Twentieth Century, p. 111


3/3
Fritzsche
The Holocaust and Modernity  
"The Holocaust,"  "Cold War," Imagining the Twentieth Century, pp. 66.86The Age of Extremes, pp. 142-177



3/5
Oberdeck
Spirit of the Age - 1950-1980  
Making the Postmodern "Movie Audience,"
 "Suburbs," Imagining the Twentieth Century pp. 81,100


Week of 3/8
Second Assignment due in discussion section


3/10
Reagan
The Struggle for the Body  
"Women's War," "Jersey Shore,"
 "Barbie," "The Pill," Imaginging the Twentieth Century pp. 61, 31, 79,163


3/12
Leff
The Great Depression and the Welfare State 

 The Age of Extremes, p. 85-108


SPRING BREAK



3/24
Koenker
Women and Emancipation:For What, For Whom, For When? 
The Age of Extremes pp. 403-460


3/26
Prochaska
From the Battle of Algiers to the Algerian Revolution 

"Decolonization," "Terrorism,"
"Ghandi," Imagining the Twentieth Century pp. 89, 136, 32


3/31
no class


4/2
Crummey
The global environment as recasting of International order 

"Amazonia,"  "Water," "Plastics," Imagining the Twentieth Century, pp. 142, 141,113  


4/7
Schroeder
The Twentieth Century in International Politics: Worst
of Centuries?  
The Age of Extremes, pp. 403-499 "United Nations," "Lost Patriots," Imagining the Twentieth Century, pp. 138, 134


4/9
Doak & Fritzsche
Debate on Identity and Community  


4/10-4/11
weekend reading: Bharati Mucherjee, Jasmine


4/14
Stewart
Transnationality and the New Order of Inbetweeness 

"Creating Race," Imagining the Twentieth Centuryp. 125


4/16
Fu
Human Rights as International Order  
 "Human Rights," "Black Over
White," Imagining the Twentieth Century, pp. 128, 90


4/21
Hannauer
Spirit of the Age - 1980-1998  
From the end of the world, to the end of history, to the end of society?The Age of Extremes, pp 558-85


4/23
Ganaway
TBA


week of 4/26
third assignment due in section


4/28
Shouba
TBA


4/30
Trice 
TBA


5/5
Fritzsche & Stewart - Shouba, Trice, & Ganaway
Summing Up


  


