
LIS901 Virtual Library - American Literature 
American LiteratureThese sites include criticism, texts, bibliographies and/or biographies of American writers (from the United States and Canada) and their literature. Includes Native American and African American authors and literature.

General American Literature Sites

 The Academy of American Poets    The Listening Booth is the highlight of this site.  Listen to some of America's greatest poets read their art.  
 African American Literature     Numerous bibliographies on such topics as "documenting the history of African American literature in books,"  reference works, literary criticism,  magazine, journal and newspaper articles, dissertations, and audio tapes.
 American Drama   The journal of the American Drama Institute. Features complete tables of contents, bibiliography, and abstracts for all issues of the journal (they will soon put full text online), playwright interviews, and links to theatre resources on the internet.  
 American Literature Hypertexts    Full texts of numerous  American Literature classics.  Lots of Mark Twain and some others as well.  
 American Literature since 1865    An online syllabus of a general literature class at the University of Virginia.  Includes texts, lectures, and an extensive online gallery.
 The Canadian Literature Archive    A repository for information about Canadian writers, novelists, poets, playwrights, essayists, literary organizations, magazines, publications, books, texts and library archives. A joint project of St. John's College, the English Department of the University of Manitoba and the Archives at the Dafoe Library at the University of Manitoba.
 Documenting the American South    DAS is a database that provides primary materials offering Southern perspectives on American history, literature, and culture to teachers, students and researchers. Includes 
"First-Person Narratives of the American South, 1860-1920"; "North American Slave Narratives, Beginnings to 1920"; and "Library of Southern Literature, Beginnings to 1920".

 Humanities Text Initiative American Verse Collection    American Female Poets -  Editor:Caroline May, Publisher: Lindsay and Blakiston, City:Philadelphia, Penn., Date:1853. Includes many poets you've never heard of and a couple that you have (Anne Bradstreet, Phillis Wheatley).  Biographies and poetry.
 The Michigan State University Celebrity Lecture Series    A collection of lecture pieces by some of today's most influential and respected authors (as well as a few other "celebrities".)  The web at its best - puts you in the lecture hall.  Visit this site to hear Kurt Vonnegut, Maya Angelou, and Margaret Atwood, among others.  Includes bibliographies of each author. 
 Native American Literature    Dibaajimowinan idash Aadizookaanag  - An excellent exploration of Native American myth and folklore.  Unfortunately, many of the links don't work (last revised 1/97) but the ones that do give rare online texts of native narratives, traditional stories and picture-stories.  


 Author Sites 

 Cather, Willa    Biographic, bibliographic, and scholarly information on her life and work.
 Chopin, Kate    Etext of  The Awakening and Selected Short Stores.
 Crane, Stephen    Stephen Crane: Man, Myth, & Legend - includes biography, analysis, readings, and bibliographies.
 Dickinson, Emily    Part of the Bartleby Archive.  A collection of 59 poems. 
 Faulkner, William    Includes a library of texts, biographies, essays, geography, screenplay and movie information, a glossary, and a newsletter.
 Fitzgerald, F. Scott    The University of South Carolina's F. Scott Fitzgerald Centenary.  Includes a chronology, an online museum, some of his short stories with original text and jacket images, essays and articles, voice and film clips, and more.
 Hawthorne, Nathaniel     "Dedicated to enhancing our understanding and appreciation of Hawthorne's writings and life."  Includes text, criticism, and biographical information.
 Percy, Walker    The Walker Percy Project - Includes essays & interviews, a multimedia gallery, scholarly resources, educational activities, online archives, etc.  This is a hefty site that will please any Percy reader/scholar.
 Poe, Edgar Allan    Frazuh's Edgar Allan Poe Collection - A few of his works in full text, not in stanza or paragraph form.  The best part is the background music; read The Raven while listening to the Xfiles theme song.
 Poe, Edgar Allan    The Edgar Allan Poe Society of Baltimore - Includes a biography, bibliography, and links to etext. 
  Steinbeck, John    An excellent site for primary source materials and critical analysis. 
 Twain, Mark    Mark Twain in His Times - focuses on how Twain and his works were "created and defined, marketed and performed, reviewed and appreciated."  Includes a large collection of primary source material.
 Twain, Mark    Mark Twain's Huckleberry Finn: Text, Illustrations, and Early Reviews.   "This collection offers a complete early edition of Huckleberry Finn, the 174 illustrations from the first edition, and the obscene illustration that appeared in the sales prospectuses. Also included: dozens of early reviews from newspapers and magazines across the country; early ads; the London and American first edition covers; and a 1930 article by E.W. Kemble describing his experiences illustrating Huckleberry Finn."
 Whitman, Walt    Walt Whitman Notebooks - Library of Congress site which contains the texts and some news clips concerning the now recovered Whitman butterfly journals.
 Whitman, Walt    Leaves of Grass by Walt Whitman - includes biographical notes, text, and index.


BACK to Literature Home Page

