


Pepperdine University School of Public Policy Syllabus MPP 661 Herschensohn





PEPPERDINE UNIVERSITY
SCHOOL OF PUBLIC POLICY
THE WORLD LEADERSHIP ROLE OF THE UNITED STATES
SYLLABUS
MPP 661
Fall, 2000
Wednesdays, 8:00 a.m. - 12:00 p.m.
Bruce Herschensohn
Telephone Extension: 7691
Telephone Off-Campus: (323) 969-9116 or (909) 621-6825
FAX: (323) 851-3499
Course Introduction:
After the victory of World War II, the United States could have demanded
that the devastated nations became its taxpayers. Instead, it gave its
own taxes for the rebuilding of the territory and economies of foreign
friends and former foes. This nation's strength in war and morality in
peace were unprecedented in human history.
The United States then became engaged in a Cold War (sometimes very
hot) that lasted almost a half-century. Now that the 20th century is done
it is recognized throughout the world by current friend and foe alike as
the Century of America. Without the United States, it would have been known
as the Century of Nazism or the Century of Communism, whichever of the
two powers would have won the final battle, not that it would have made
much difference since either way it would have been the Century of Slavery.
In 1961 during a private Oval Office discussion between President Kennedy
and Richard Nixon, President Kennedy said that foreign policy "is the only
important issue for a President to handle, isn't it? I mean who (cares)
if the minimum wage is $ 1.15 or $ 1.25 in comparison to something like
this?" That remark may make many federal officers close their eyes and
shudder as they prefer to put the federal government in areas not delegated
to them, but President Kennedy was merely putting President James Madison's
beliefs into the conversational dialogue of his own times.
Since the dismemberment of the Soviet Union, the foreign policy of the
United States appears to have become erratic, moving without a sense of
destination. Currently, many leading politicians want to continue to cut
our defenses while many other leading politicians have adopted the 1972
George McGovern slogan of "Come Home, America." Many business interests
have passion for expanding contracts, even in nations ruled by totalitarians.
Their moral justification is that such international trade will bring about
human rights and democracy in the host countries. Should our federal government
continue to encourage such quests in selected countries? If these trends
are maintained, will the 21st Century be known as the Century of World
Liberty? Or the Century of the People's Republic of China? Or the Century
of the Islamic Fundamentalist Revolution? Or the Century of Russia's hegemony?
Or will it be known by the name of a power that is currently submerged
or yet unborn?
 
Course Description:
This course will examine the most critical current questions of U.S.
foreign policy. The term "national interest" is now the criterion on which
many say they measure those foreign policy areas in which we should become
engaged, but what does the term mean?
Do we judge national interest on pragmatism or morality or by some kind
of undefined balance between the two? Is Bosnia in our national interest?
Kosovo? Iraq? The Republic of China on Taiwan? Cuba? Burkina Faso?
What is the proper answer to the question, "Should the United States
be the policeman of the world?" What did President Clinton have in mind
when he said, "The United States should not become involved as a partisan
in a war"? Is the United States to be engaged as a non-partisan in wars?
Are our armed forces best used for military engagements or as a uniformed
Peace Corps?
Is the United States currently spending too much, enough, or too little
on our military? Was the Strategic Defense Initiative foolish or visionary?
In this new century will you see the richest goal of mankind achieved.
all the peoples of the world living in liberty? Or will you find yourselves
living in times dominated by the ultimate victory of tyrants?
 
Course Objectives:
This course will strive for conclusions on current and future U S. foreign
policies through examining the magnitude and significance of United States
foreign policies during the administrations of U.S. presidents born in
the 20th Century, (to quote President Kennedy in his Inaugural Address,
"tempered by war, disciplined by a hard and bitter peace, proud of our
ancient heritage, and unwilling to witness or permit the slow undoing of
those human rights to which this nation has always been committed today
at home and around the world.") Although we will discuss the foreign policies
of Presidents Kennedy, Johnson, Nixon, Ford, Carter, Reagan, Bush and Clinton,
our focus and emphasis will be on what U.S. foreign policy should be in
2000, forward.
 
Grading:
Involvement in discussion: 50% (Not absolute) Quality, not length, of
final paper: 50% (Not absolute) The paper will be based on the following
premise: a new United States President is elected, and that President-elect's
campaign has been based on domestic policy (which has been true since 1992)
with only tacit remarks about foreign policy. This President has little
interest or experience in international affairs; The new President appoints
you as Secretary of State and asks you to submit a paper regarding the
directions he should take in foreign policy.
There is no required list of books to read but, rather, a suggested
reading list.
 
Office Hours:
Wednesday afternoon after class, or another day/time on request.
 
Course Outline:
Current events will dictate a good deal of the order in which we will
discuss our foreign policies. Although all the following subjects will
be covered, they will not necessarily be in the order listed below. The
following is the order we will follow if current events do not dictate
changes in sequence:
CLASS 1
The U.S. Constitutional Responsibilities Regarding Foreign Affairs
Domestic Affairs vs. Foreign Affairs and Defense. Presidential vs. Congressional
Authority over Foreign Affairs. Recent Presidential Involvement in Foreign
Affairs. Recent Congress' regarding Foreign Affairs. Current International
Events Over-View for the remainder of the 106th Congress and the coming
107th Congress.
28 Minute Film of the United States Information Agency (Shown Only in
Foreign Countries) "The Five Cities of June" Narrated by Charlton Heston.
(Some of the films to be exhibited were made for the United States Information
Agency and never seen in the United States. They were produced for foreign
audiences to help achieve U.S. foreign policy objectives. The role of information
and communications in service to U.S. foreign policy objectives will be
discussed throughout the course.)
CLASS 2
Recent Foreign Policy Debates: Kosovo Pakistan and India Elian Gonzalez
from Cuba Sierra Leon Ballistic Missile Defense
CLASS 3
U.S. Policy Regarding the People's Republic of China The Republic of
China on Taiwan Hong Kong and Macau Tibet The Spratly Islands and the South.
China Sea
CLASS 4
There will be a speech to attend on campus, in which we will discuss
global foreign policy. The lecture-session will go from 8:00 am to 10 am.
We will then go back to class for continued discussion.
CLASS 5
Presidents Kennedy's and Johnson's Continuing Effect on Foreign Affairs
including a 90 Minute film of the United States Information Agency for
Foreign Distribution: "Years of Lightning, Day of Drums" Narrated by Gregory
Peck
CLASS 6
President Nixon's Continuing Effect on Foreign Policy
The Presidency - The Congress
The Paris Peace Accords including President Clinton's Diplomatic
Recognition of Vietnam
Detente Regarding the Soviet Union
The China Initiative
Watergate's Effect on Foreign Policy
The War Powers Resolution
Personal Notes
The Vietnam War, Cambodia, Laos
The Media
How the Media Influences Foreign Policy
Hotel Journalism
"The Christmas Bombing"
Videotape regarding the Media
CLASS 7
Presidents Ford and President Carter's Continuing Effect on Foreign
Policy The Mayaquez, Pardoning of Draft Evaders, Human Rights, Nicaragua,
Iran, Panama Canal, Camp David Accords
U.S. Foreign Policy Regarding Europe, the European Union, Russia, Commonwealth
of Independent States, Yugoslavia, NATO Treaty Obligations (The Births
and Deaths of SEATO and CENTO), The Foreign Policy Role and the Definition
of Propaganda
Continuation of Videotape regarding the Media
CLASS 8
U.S. Foreign Policy Regarding the Mideast Israel/Arab States "The Peace
Process" "Land for Peace" Negotiated Settlements Islamic Fundamentalism
Iran Iraq
Videotape regarding the Decade of the 1960s
CLASS 9
The Philippines, Japan, Korea, India, Pakistan, Afghanistan, Mongolia,
Burma.
Presidents Reagan and Bush's Continuing Effect on Foreign Policy. U.S.
Support of U.K. in Falklands War, Lebanon, Grenada, Terrorism, The Philippines,
Attack on Libya, Iran-Contra, Romanian Uprising, the Dismemberment of the
Soviet Union, U.S.-Panama, Persian Gulf War
Videotape regarding the Decade of the 1970s
CLASS 10
U.S. Foreign Policy Regarding the African Continent of 53 Countries
Continuing Wars and Totalitarians The New Democracies
U.S. Foreign Policy Regarding Latin America Mexico A Continent of 34
Democracies The Cuban Exception
Foreign Policy Implications of Next Tuesday's Elections.
CLASS 11
Discussion of Foreign Policy Implications of Yesterday's Elections.
Terrorism Afghanistan The Logan Act
CLASS 12
International Organizations
United Nations Organization
Organization of African Unity
Organization of American States
CLASS 13
The Third World Foreign Aid - Agency for International Development
Integration of Foreign and Domestic Policies Any Areas of President Clinton's
Foreign Policy Not Yet Covered
CLASS 14
Future U.S. Foreign Policy
The Ultimate Foreign Policy: Space Exploration
NASA 19 Minute Film, "The Pursuit of Immortality" Narrated by Charlton
Heston
CLASS 15
General Discussion


