



 
 

      Syllabus for
      SE-570-101 Design and Architecture of Secure Software Systems, 
      Fall 2002
body { background-color: white }


      Syllabus for
      SE-570-101 Design and Architecture of Secure Software Systems, 
      Fall 2002Overview
    This course will investigate the design and implementation of
    secure systems using cryptographic techniques and the security
    mechanisms found in the runtime environments of modern programming
    languages such as Java or C#. You will learn about ciphers and
    models of access control, as well as how class-loaders, byte-code
    verification, security managers, access control, and permissions
    are used to ensure security within Java. There will be a strong
    emphasis upon applying the theory that is discussed (using Java).
  Lecture Plan
          The following lecture plan is tentative and subject to change as
          the course progresses.
        Week 1:
    (2002/09/17)
  
    course overview; DES; key distribution.
  Week 2:
    (2002/09/23)
  
    Implementing DES; PKCS #5 padding; cipher modes; validating plaintext;
    naive key distribution
  Week 3:
    (2002/10/01)
  
    Ciphers; multiple encryption; key establishment protocols using
    symmetric-key ciphers; cryptographic hash functions.
  Week 4:
    (2002/10/08)
  
    Asymmetric Ciphers and RSA
  Week 5:
    (2002/10/15)
  
    midterm exam
Week 6:
    (2002/10/22)
  
    Certificates and JCE
  Week 7:
    (2002/10/29)
  
    Authentication; authorisation; access matrices; access-control
    lists (ACLs); capability lists; access control in Java.
  Week 8:
    (2002/11/05)
  
    Security models; multi-level access control; information flow;
    state-machine models; access control in Java (permissions,
    stack-walking, guarded objects, delegates).
  Week 9:
    (2002/11/12)
  
    To be announced
  Week 10:
    (2002/11/19)
  
    Runtime-system integrity; buffer overflows; dynamic loading and
    linking; untrusted code; static analysis / bytecode verification.
  Week 11:
    (2002/11/26)
  
    final exam

          Lecture slides will be available after each lecture.  They will
          not normally be available before the lecture.
        Prerequisites

          You must have considerable experience with Java (at
          least CSC 224 and SE 450) and some exposure to C or C++
          (including pointer arithmetic).
        

          Very useful, but optional:
        


            CSC 447 Concepts of Programming Languages
          

            DS 420 Foundations of Distributed Systems
          

            SE 550 Distributed Software Development
          

Detailed Overview

	  We will study:
	


	    Symmetric-key ciphers: DES; DES3; cipher modes of
	    operation; how to use symmetric-key ciphers securely;
	    implementation details; efficiency concerns.
	  

            Cryptographic hash functions: MD5; comparison with MACs;
            using digest algorithms to build MACs.
          

            Asymmetric-key ciphers: RSA; using asymmetric-key ciphers
            for authentication and digital signatures; public-key
            infrastructure; implementation details; efficiency
            concerns.
          

            Cryptographic protocols: Dolev-Yao threat model;
            Needham-Schroeder protocol (symmetric-key and
            asymmetric-key versions); Yahalom protocol; Wide-Mouthed
            Frog protocol; using nonces and timestamps.
          

            Java Cryptography Architecture (JCA): provider
            architecture; symmetric-key ciphers, message digests, and
            asymmetric-key ciphers with Java Cryptography Extension
            (JCE); key management.
          

            Runtime-system integrity: use of stacks; pointers into the
            stack; using pointer arithmetic to violate stack
            integrity; buffer overflow example in C (on x86);
            byte-code verification.
	  

            Dynamic loading and linking: class loading; signing code.
          

            Authorization and access control: authentication
            vs. authorization; design principles; authorization lists;
            capabilities; permissions; protection domains; access
            control based upon stack-walking; security manager; access
            controller; circumventing stack-walking using privileged
            code.
          

Course Objectives

          By the end of this course you should:
	


            Be very familiar with common cryptographic algorithms such
            as DES and RSA.
          

            Be able to implement cryptographic algorithms from their
            specifications.
          

            Have practical experience with the majority of the Java
            Cryptography Architecture.
          

            Be familiar with common vulnerabilities in cryptographic
            protocols, and how they can be avoided.
          

            Be able to recognize unsound security practices in
            software systems.
          

            Understand Java's class-loading mechanism.
          

            Understand Java's security model for the execution of
            untrusted code.
          

            Have practical experience with designing APIs that cross
            security boundaries.
          

Textbooks

Required:




              Java Security, by Scott Oaks, 2nd edition, May 2001, ISBN 0596001576.
            



              Security Engineering, 2001, by Ross Anderson, published
              by Wiley, ISBN 0471389226.
            



Optional:


          You may want a cryptography or cryptology reference.  There
          are several options.
        

          The best option is the most expensive, unfortunately.  The
          
            "Dr. Dobb's Journal Essential Books on Cryptography &
            Security CD"
          
          contains seven very good books on cryptography and security
          in PDF.  Some of these books are out of print, and,
          individually, some of the hardcopies are as expensive as the
          CD.  Of course, you do have to read them online or print
          them.  The CD contains the following books:
        



              Applied Cryptography: Protocols, Algorithms, and Source
              Code in C, second edition
            



              Cryptography: A New Dimension in Computer Data Security 
            



              Contemporary Cryptology: The Science of Information
            


 
              Cryptography and Data Security 
             (this would be required if still in print)
          


              Applied Cryptography, Cryptographic Protocols, and Computer Security 
            



              Cryptography: Theory and Practice 
            



              Handbook of Applied Cryptography 
            


            Military Cryptanalysis, Volume I-IV 
          


              RSA Laboratories FAQ on Cryptography, RSA Laboratories
              Technical Reports, RSA Laboratories Security Bulletins,
              and CryptoBytes Newsletter
            



          If the link to
          
            "Dr. Dobb's Journal Essential Books on Cryptography &
            Security CD"
          
          does not work, go to the
          
            Dr. Dobb's CDROM store , 
          and you will be forwarded to the Digital River site.  Follow
          the link for "Essential Book Collections on CD-ROM", and you
          should then see the link for "Dr. Dobb's Journal Essential
          Books on Cryptography & Security CD".
        

          If you would prefer a physical book, I recommend the
          following books in this order:
        



              Cryptography & Network Security: Principles & Practice
            



              Applied Cryptography: Protocols, Algorithms, and Source
              Code in C, second edition
            



              Handbook of Applied Cryptography 
             
            (very good, but difficult unless you have a strong mathematical background)
          


          The following books are very good, but not necessary for this course.
          Ask me before you order them.
        



              SSL and TLS: Designing and Building Secure Systems
            



              SSL & TLS Essentials: Securing the Web
            



              Securing Java: Getting Down to Business with Mobile Code, second edition
            



              Java Cryptography
            



              Codes and Cryptography
            



              Modelling and Analysis of Security Protocols
            


Contact InformationInstructor: Corin PitcherInstructor Home Page: http://fpl.cs.depaul.edu/cpitcher/Instructor Email: cpitcher@cs.depaul.eduPhone: 312/362-5248Office: Room 838, Suite 401, School of CTI, DePaul University, 243 South Wabash Avenue, Chicago, IL 60604-2301, USAOffice Hours: 
    TO BE ANNOUNCED
    
  Course Home Page: http://fpl.cs.depaul.edu/cpitcher/se570/Attendance


            You must attend both the midterm (Tuesday 2002/10/15) and final
            (Tuesday 2002/11/26) exams. A medical note will be required for an
            absence. Business trips or vacations are not valid reasons
            for missing the exams. Block out those dates now!
          


          Class attendance is strongly encouraged, but not mandatory.
          However, if you are absent from class you are responsible
          for understanding the material and for finding out about any
          announcements made in that class.
        
Assessment

          Your final grade will be based on:
        


            Homework: 50%
          

            Midterm and final exams: 25% each
          


          Assessment for homework assignments will be based on whether
          they achieve the set task and quality of the code.
        

          Unless otherwise stated, homework assignments are due by 5:45PM
          on the day of the class after the class in which they are assigned.
          You are expected to complete all of the homework assignments by
          the deadline.  Late homework submissions will not be accepted,
          and all homework assignments will count towards the final grade.
        

          Homework assignments must be submitted through the online
          system.  Email submissions will not be accepted.


          There will be no extra credit homework and/or projects.
        


