






Community Information Corps Syllabus


SI 575 Community Information Corps Seminar
Professor Paul Resnick
Winter 2002
Syllabus
Last revised 03/19/02 (PR). 
Meets Fridays 12-1:30  in 311 West Hall (bring your lunch!)
Schedule
email list: si.cic.discuss (I have deliberately not made it a link, so that
automated programs won't be able to figure out the full address and send us
SPAM. It's @umich.edu). Right now, si.cic.discuss includes si.cic.students and
selected faculty members. If people on si.cic.students complain about too much
mail, we may change who receives si.cic.discuss messages. 
This 1-credit seminar course offers reading, reflection, and social networking
experiences for students who are engaged in projects or considering careers as public
informationists, (i.e., organizing information flows in support of communal and
public needs). Many students will enroll concurrently in some kind of project work, either
through a Directed Field Experience (DFE), an independent study, or a workshop course.
We will read about and discuss theories of community, civil society, and the role of
the non-profit sector, and draw connections with project work (reading and reflection).
There will also be frequent opportunities to learn about other students' projects and to
meet some of the national leaders of the community information movement (social
networking) and possibly to travel to relevant conferences and workshops. At the end of this
course, students who are interested in pursuing careers in the community information
movement should have enough information and connections to begin a job search in this
area. 
This seminar also serves as a focal point for the School of Information's Community
Information Corps, a loosely organized  interest group of faculty, doctoral and
master's students, and outside "friends". Several faculty will be
dropping in, and students who do not wish to sign up for credit are welcome to come for
those sessions that they find interesting.
You are encouraged to participate for multiple semesters (you can take it for credit up
to four times); while we'll keep revisiting similar themes, there will be minimal overlap in
the readings and guests. The faculty coordinator will rotate as well, leading to
slightly different emphases in different semesters.
Early in each semester, there will be announcements about project opportunities with
faculty and Directed Field Experience opportunities. Students will be encouraged to
reflect on their project experiences in the class. Academic credit for these projects,
however, will not be arranged through this class. DFEs will be administered
through Karen Jordan. Workshop courses have their own course numbers. Other projects will
be arranged as independent study directly with the supervising faculty member.
This semester, there will be a lot more opportunities for students to shape
our activities. Read on to hear more.
Pre-requisites
None. 
Objectives
After participating in SI 575, you should be able to: 


connect day-to-day grassroots activities with big ideas about citizenship, opportunity,
    and the public good in an information society.
find a job or internship as a public informationist.

The Big Ideas

Community, social capital, public goods, and collective action 
Democracy and citizenship 
Inequality, diversity, identity, and power
The institutional landscape of public interest information work 
The impact of infrastructure

Throughout our examination of these ideas, we will keep returning to implications for
the roles of information professionals.
We will keep returning to these ideas each semester, but usually with somewhat
different readings and guests to guide our exploration.
Readings
Readings will be handed out in class, or available on the Web. You will need to read
materials before class so that we can have lively discussion (see reaction paper
assignments below). 
Assignments and Due Dates
This is a 1-credit class. Class meets for an hour and a half each week. You should
spend, on average, about two and a half hours each week outside of class, doing the
following: 


Before and after each class where an article is discussed, join in the
    email discussion of the article 
Participate in the email discussions about guests and other topics that
    arise
Do your share of the work required to keep this communal enterprise going,
    in whatever roles you feel comfortable taking on (see section below on
    student roles)
At the end of the semester you'll be required to hand in a 4-5 page reflection paper
    reflecting on what you've learned. This will be due on April 19.

Student Roles 
There are a number of ways for you to get involved in the running of the
Community Information Corps. Find one or more roles that you're comfortable with
and sign up! 

Lead the discussion of an article-- usually a team of two students, with
    as much help from the professor as you'd like to have (see notes in
    schedule)
Host a visitor (invite; orient speaker; select and distribute materials
    for students to read in preparation; arrange a social event; introduce
    speaker; organize on-line discussion that arises following)-- usually a team
    of 2-3 students (see notes in schedule)
Organize the ACT/CIC presence at the SI ExpoSItion late in the semester--
    (Leilani Dawson and Michele Sweetser)
Develop a better CIC Web presence-- (Mihir Mahajan, Kate Lockwood)
Present your CIC-related project work (DFE, job, volunteer position, or
    project with professor) at the ACT/CIC booth at the SI ExpoSItion, or in
    class
Help other students find a job (summer or permanent) by sharing leads that
    you've identified
Organize a social activity
Organize the making of this year's copy of the CIC Photo Directory (Vik
    Vaishya and Ammy Phuwanartnurak)
Organize the making and distribution of vests for new members (Beth
    Blankley)

Grading
This class must be elected pass/fail (satisfactory/unsatisfactory). This is not a class
that lends itself to conventional grading.
Office Hours
Tuesdays 3-4PM and Fridays 1:30-2:30PM. It's a good idea to call in advance or send email, as
there are a few days when I'll have to miss office hours. 


presnick@umich.edu
647-9458
314 West Hall

The CIC Lab
We have room 232D as a base for student and faculty projects. Enjoy the great
location while you can: we'll probably have to move to SI North in the fall.
There is a phone (615-8258) for incoming calls and outgoing local calls. There
is no voice mail.
Who should use the lab? Anyone who self-identifies as a CIC member should use
the lab, especially to organize CIC activities or work on a CIC project. See the
section below for guidelines about what counts as a CIC project.
There are more people who use the lab at least occasionally than there are
computers in the lab, so you may not always get to use the same computer. If you
need space to leave things, you should be able to claim a file drawer or a
bookshelf. Talk to people who have been using the lab in prior semesters to
negotiate such a space. If the lab gets crowded, it may become necessary to give
priority to CIC project work over other SI classwork uses of the lab. So far,
that hasn't been necessary, and several students have made it their primary work
space. 
CIC Projects
A CIC project is one that:

involves analyzing and/or organizing flows of information AND
promotes the production of public goods and/or reduction of inequality

A CIC project may be organized by faculty, with student participation through
DFE, independent study, PEP workshop course, hourly pay, or GSRA. Some ongoing
faculty-led projects include:

Who's That? Building Social Capital in groups through photo directories.
    (Resnick)
NPTechAssist recommender service for Non-Profit technology assistance
    providers. Working with NPower Michigan. (Resnick)
CoTelCo (Cogburn)
How Libraries and Librarians
    Help: Context Centered Methods for Evaluating Public Library Efforts at
    Bridging the Digital Divide and Building Community (Durrance)
Environmental scan on knowledge management for the W.K. Kellogg Foundation
    (Atkins)
CHICO (Frost)
IT and the future of higher education (Atkins and Dudestadt)

A CIC project need not involve faculty, however. For example, a DFE or
internship or even a job or volunteer activity might qualify, if the student can
articulate how it meets the criteria above. For projects that are not faculty
led, it is up to the students to identify the relevant projects they are
involved in, and to bring them to the attention of other students and faculty at
appropriate times. Two appropriate times are student status reports in the CIC
seminars and the ACT/CIC presence at the ExpoSItion.
Sue Davidsen has identified the following DFE opportunities as of potential
interest to CIC students: 

Community Residence Corporation http://intel.si.umich.edu/cfdocs/si/dfe/dfe-viewer.cfm?RecordID=210
Legal Services Technology Network http://intel.si.umich.edu/cfdocs/si/dfe/dfe-viewer.cfm?RecordID=207
Arab Community Center (ACCESS) http://intel.si.umich.edu/cfdocs/si/dfe/dfe-viewer.cfm?RecordID=196
Another Ann Arbor http://intel.si.umich.edu/cfdocs/si/dfe/dfe-viewer.cfm?RecordID=171

In addition, Kathleen Teodoro of NPower Michigan and Jennifer Bright of
NPower Seattle are "interested in having a student review the existing
web-hosted tools that handle (1) file sharing and (2) conferencing. We're
interested in which tools might be useful tools for nonprofit boards. We might
then pursue a relationship with one vendor or decide to host something
ourselves." This could potentially be a job or DFE for the right student.
Other students may have ideas for other opportunities, especially with
community technology centers. Send email to the si.cic.discuss email list saying
what you're looking for.
The CI Fellows Program
The Community Information Fellows Program is a competitive fellowship for
graduates of the School of Information who plan to take public interest jobs. It
provides money, mentoring, and a network. Apply while you're still a student.
For more details see the web page.
Note that the terms of the fellowship may be somewhat different this year, and
that some of the procedures may change. Please check the site again when it gets
closer to the Feb. 15 deadline for applications. (We're also not sure yet
whether we'll have funding, but we're hoping.)
Support for Summer Jobs
Last year we were able to supplement summer salaries for public interest jobs
and internships. We hope to have money to do that again this year. For info on
last year's program, see the web
page. Watch for more information on this year's program in the coming
months.
Travel and Social Networking
If you find a conference that's worth going to and that you think will help you in
assessing or developing job prospects or developing project ideas for future semesters, you can ask me
for travel funds. That's right. We have funds to pay for you to travel. You'll
have to 

justify why this conference is appropriate as a learning or networking
    opportunity for you as a public informationist;
be frugal to keep expenses down;
share a trip report with your classmates when you get back

Please take advantage of this great opportunity! 
About ACT and Its Relationship to CIC
ACT, the Alliance for Community Technology (www.communitytechnology.org), conducts a number of catalytic
activities at the nexus of academia, community serving organizations and social
investors. These activities include environmental scanning, convening
discussions and framing emerging issues such as the potential role of open
source software and ASPs for non-profit organizations, incubating innovative
projects such as digital libraries for Native American Tribal Colleges.
developing new knowledge about community technology through research, and
training the next generation of public interest and community informationists.
This last activity, grooming the next generation, is where CIC fits in. CIC
is the identifier for the suite of ACT activities involving students. For
obvious reasons, the CIC name is somewhat more prominent inside SI, while the
ACT name is more prominent in external relations with with organizations that
may have less direct contact with students. ACT is the overall entity; CIC is a
part of ACT.
Session Schedule
This schedule is likely to be juggled significantly after the semester begins. Please
consult the online version for the latest.






Date
Topic
mini-event
Guest
Session Leaders
Readings


Jan
      11
Intro to CIC, ACT, and the Seminar; project opportunities
 
 
 
 


Jan
      18
Public Goods
task sign-ups
 
Katy Kramp
      Sadanori Horiguchi
Peter Kollock, The Economies of Online Cooperation: Gifts
      and Public Goods in Cyberspace, Chapter 9 in Smith, M. and Kollock,
      P., eds. Communities in Cyberspace


Jan
      20
POTLUCK DINNER at Prof. Resnick's house, 5-8PM
 
You!
 
 


Jan
      25
Civil Society
photo directory making
 
Beverly Ku
      Beth Blankley
Walzer, M.  The Idea of Civil Society


Jan
      29
Kellogg e-philanthropy grantees meeting reception; 4:15PM
      Ehrlicher Room
 
 
 
 


Feb
      1
Identities
Megan Kinney report on Networking for Good conference
 
Vishant Shah
      Junko Sagawa
Minow, Martha. Not only for Myself: Identity, Politics
      and the Law. Pp. 9-58.


Feb
      8
 
 
 
 
 


Feb
      15
Community Based Research
 
Ann Bishop, University of Illinois
Vishant Shah
      Beverly Ku
 


Feb
      22
Student Networking: The job hunt
 
 
 
 


March
      1
NO CLASS-- VACATION
 
 
 
 


March
      8
Geographic Information Systems: how non-professionals are
      using these tools
Alison Aldrich: Broadway Park Cultural Landscape Restoration
Asli Gocmen
Wayne Buente, Krissa Rumsey
 


March
      15
No regular class. 3-5PM public session with visiting CIC
      Mentors and Fellows (details TBA)
 
 
 
 


March
      22
NPower Michigan: current problems brainstorming session
      (Class is on: Professor Resnick out of town)

status report:
      Anna Leavitt on ASP pilot
Kathleen Teodoro
Katy Kramp
      Anna Leavitt
 
    


March
      29
Social Entrepreneurship
 
Leslie Crutchfield, Ashoka
Michele Sweetser
 


April
      5
Evaluation: how can we tell if our work is working?
status report: Joan Durrance's project on tools for
      evaluation 
conference phone call with Amy Borgstrom from TOP

      Carol Treat Morton,
      Marianne Ryan
 


April
      12
Closing session: looking back, planning ahead
Carol Treat Morton, All Saints CTC
      Lisa Copeland, SistaGirls.org

 
 
 


TBD
Universal Access to Telecommunications Services
 
 
Daphne Ogle
Cooper, Mark. Universal Service: A Historical Perspective
      and Policies for the Twenty-First Century



Community Technology Centers and CyberPower
 
?Kate Williams?
      ?Abdul Alkalimat?

Nathan Parham, Lou Weber

Abdul Alkalimat and Kate Williams. Social Capital and
      Cyberpower in the African American Community: A Case Study of a Community
      Technology Center in the Dual City. http://www.communitytechnology.org/cyberpower/


Other events:

CIC Fellows and Mentors retreat (current CIC members invited to parts of
    it). March 15-16.
SI ExpoSItion, April 5.
March 22-23 prospective students visit



