   Aspects of the English Language syllabus      ENG 346: Aspects of the EnglishLanguage      Objectives Language means everything. Throughwords--spoken, written, or signed--we propose and seal, agree and argue,analyze and worship, amuse and enlighten. They are between us, around us,and within us. Any understanding of these invisible, intangible, omnipotententities, then, must make us more insightful, effective, and sentient ineverything we do. In this course, we will pursue this understanding by examiningmany fascinating facets of our own language, English, including its history,structure, and usage. We will cover this material with the following objectivesin mind: Deeper appreciation of language:Our primary objective is to expand our understanding of how words make meaning.We will analyze language on several levels, including phonology (phoneme,assimilation, allophone), morphology (bound morpheme, inflection), and syntax(disjunct, transformation). We will pay special attention to the implicationsthat many of these linguistic elements, such as syntactic ambiguity andthe passive voice, have for semantics.  Broader understanding of the humanities: Because language reflects a great deal about the people who speakit, this course also will provide you with an opportunity to look closelyat how humans think and interact. During our units on psycholinguisticsand sociolinguistics, for example, we will study children's acquisitionof language, the way the brain processes language, and the nature and effectsof dialect, register, slang, taboo, and other linguistic phenomena. Expanded cultural literacy:Because of the allusive nature of all language, names constitute a crucialpart of a person's vocabulary. As we study language, you will expand yourcultural vocabulary to include the names of many people (Noah Webster, NoamChomsky), places (Danelaw, London), and events (Norman Conquest, Great VowelShift). Reading: Through our technicalstudy of English, particularly its lexicon and syntax, you will expand yourvocabulary and your ability to extract meaning from sophisticated syntax,thus preparing yourself to interpret the complex, often veiled messagesyou encounter in law, business, and the media. Research: You will learn tocomplement the knowledge you glean in class with knowledge you gather onyour own through research. In addition to becoming familiar with standardlinguistic reference materials (The Dictionary of American Regional English,The Oxford English Dictionary), you will polish several general researchskills (paraphrasing, quoting, documenting).  Communication: In a varietyof assignments and other activities, you will develop essential skills inboth writing (argumentation, organization, editing) and speaking (pronunciation,intonation). Technology: To complement theseother skills, you will learn to make effective use of technology to findand share information. By the end of the course, you will be able to findmaterial on the World Wide Web, communicate via a listserv and an onlineforum, and design a Web site.  Supplies Required  David Crystal, The Cambridge Encyclopedia of the English  Language  Three-ring binder and ten dividers Three IBM-formatted computer diskettes An e-mail account A curious, active, and open mind  Recommended  The American Heritage College Dictionary  Be Your Best You can expect me to be the best teacher I can be. I willbe on time to class, give you my full attention and energy during everyclass discussion, respond thoughtfully to your oral comments and writtenassignments, and work hard to make this course interesting and rewarding. I expect you to be your best, as well. Although this courseis no more difficult than most college courses, it demands regular attendance,a commitment to in-class discussion and writing, and a large amount of out-of-classpreparation, including reading and writing assignments, library research,and study. I expect you to make these commitments, to show up to class ontime and ready to work, to check your e-mail and the online forum for announcements,and to turn in neatly typed, carefully edited assignments on time. Pleasenote that I will not accept late assignments except in the case of personalincapacitation, a death in the family, or an advance arrangement with me.For tips on improving your study habits, see Be Your Best. Fall 1999 · 149 Dial · 8-8:50MWF  Professor Mark Canada 118 Dial, 521-6431 University of North Carolina at Pembroke canada@sassette.uncp.edu www.uncp.edu/home/canada Office Hours: 9:15-10:15 MTWRF Schedule History of English August 18: Be Your BestAugust 20: Proto-Indo-European August 23: OldEnglish August 25: OldEnglish August 27: Research August 30: MiddleEnglish September 1: MiddleEnglish September 3: EarlyModern English September 6: No class (Labor Day) September 8: EarlyModern English September 10: ModernEnglish September 13: WorldEnglish Structure of English September 15: Lexicon September 17: Lexicon September 20: Lexicon September 22: Lexicon September 24: Lexicon September 27: Lexicon September 29: Grammar October 1: Grammar October 4: Grammar October 6: Grammar October 8: Grammar October 11: Phonology October 13: Phonology October 15: No class (fall break) Sociolinguistics October 18: Semantics October 20: Writing October 22: Writing October 25: Dialect October 27: Dialect October 29: Dialect November 1: Slang November 3: Register November 5: Slangand register November 8: Jargon November 10-12: Sociolinguisticsreview Psycholinguistics November 15: Language acquisition November 17: Language acquisition November 19: Language acquisition November 22: Language between the sexes November 24: Idiolects November 26: No class (Thanksgiving vacation) November 29: Dyslexia December 1: Language and technology December 3: Language and technology December 6: Review   Assignments Format During class on the day an assignment is due, you mustturn in a 9x12 envelope containing the following items in the order listed:  The first item must be a hard copy of your final draft.  This draft must be typed in an appropriate font, such as 12-point Times,  and must be bound with a paper clip.  Behind this final draft must be all of the material you  used or created in preparing this assignment, including rough drafts, notes,  and photocopies of all sources you quoted or paraphrased. The final item must be an IBM-formatted diskette containing  all of your work on the assignment, including your outline, rough drafts,  and final draft. This diskette should have a label with your name, e-mail  address, and telephone number on it.  Write your name, e-mail address, and telephone number onthe outside of this envelope and turn it into me when I request it in class.If you cannot be in class when I collect the assignment, you must notifyme in advance. Failure to follow these guidelines may result in an F forthe assignment. Each project must be your own work. That is, except forproperly cited quotations, every sentence and phrase must be in your ownwords. All interpretations, except for those properly cited, also must beyour own. If you turn in someone else's work, use a source's exact wordswithout placing these words in quotation marks, or use an interpretationyou found in a source without giving credit to the source, you may failthis course. You must be prepared to prove that you have done all your ownwork by showing me your sources and discussing the details of your projectwith me in conference. Criteria Before you submit a final draft of any assignment, pleasereview the following criteria, which I will use in grading each assignment:  Content: The project should  thoroughly address its subject with accurate, credible, timely, and relevant  information. If the project is supposed to be argumentative, it should  state a clear, substantive, contestable, and precise claim early and support  this claim with appropriate evidence. Clarity: The project should  present information in a clear, logical fashion. In particular, paragraphs  generally should begin with precise topic sentences, followed by clear,  well-organized sentences that support the topic sentence. The writer should  use transitional words and phrases effectively to guide the reader through  the information. Readability: The project  should engage the reader with lively, concise writing and should generally  lack typographical errors, as well as lapses in tone, register, punctuation,  spelling, word choice, and grammar. The project should effectively incorporate  source material with proper use of attribution, paraphrases, and quotations.  Longer projects should begin with an engaging introduction and include  a satisfying conclusion. Format: Parenthetical citations  and the bibliography or list of works cited should conform to MLA style.  The project also should have a neat, professional appearance and conform  to any particular format requirements set by the instructor.   Using a point system, I will assign grades as follows:  A (90-100 percent): This  project clearly meets all of these criteria, although it may contain one  or two very minor lapses. B (80-89 percent): This project  contains a few minor lapses, but otherwise generally meets the criteria  for an A. C (70-79 percent): This project  may contain more than a few minor lapses or one major lapse. Nevertheless,  it adequately meets the requirements of the assignment. D (60-69 percent): This project  may be strong in one area, but it contains many minor or major lapses and,  as a result, does not adequately meet the requirements of the assignment. F (below 60 percent): This  project contains plagiarism or an overwhelming number of lapses that make  it an inadequate response to the assignment.  Quizzes (40 points) Throughout the semester you will have several opportunitiesto apply your knowledge of language in quizzes, which may take the formof exercises, short-answer tests, or essay questions. These quizzes willcover linguistic terms and concepts, as well as background material, suchas information about significant people, places, and events. In some cases,I will post quiz questions on the course's online forum and ask you to respondin this same forum. In other cases, I will give quizzes during class. BecauseI often will allow you to refer to your portfolios to write this essay,you will want to take extensive notes on your reading and on class activities,including group and class discussions. Furthermore, because some quizzeswill call on you to synthesize both new and old information, you shouldreview these notes each week. To earn credit for these quizzes, you mustrespond to questions on the discussion forum before class begins and bepresent when I assign in-class quizzes. World Wide Web Page (20 points) Please visit All American: Literature, History, and Culture, a WorldWide Web site that I have created with the help of my students, and becomefamiliar with this site's content and format. In this assignment, your groupwill create an individual Web page for possible publication on All American.This page, which you should aim at readers with little or no knowledge oflinguistics, will provide a thorough introduction to one of the followingaspects of American English: dialect, taboo, euphemism, slang, register,or jargon. Your group's page should include the following elements:  a title bar indicating the period you are covering (Colonial  America, 1607-1783; Antebellum and Civil War America, 1784-1865; Postbellum  America, 1866-1913; or Modern America, 1914-present); a word or phrase indicating the subject you are covering  in this period; a byline featuring your names, followed by a line saying,  "Students, University of North Carolina at Pembroke"; a 600-word essay that describes your subject, defines  relevant terms, summarizes major issues relevant to this subject, and supports  these points by referring to at least two articles or books by scholars; an annotated bibliography that analyzes the content,  timeliness, and credibility of at least two relevant scholarly sources; a sidebar featuring lists of relevant people, places,  events, and subjects; links to at least two relevant Internet sites, such as  sites with more information about the subject; an exercise through which users can study this subject.  On an assigned day, your group will introduce this conceptto the rest of the class through an oral presentation lasting 20-30 minutesand featuring the following elements:  a demonstration of the group's Web page; an interactive class discussion involving the exercise  on the page.   Article (20 points) Choose a particular topic relevant to your group's subject.For example, if your group built a Web page on slang, you might do someresearch on the particular slang used by women in a modern college sorority.In an article of about 1,000 words, analyze this element in depth. Yourarticle should appear in the form of a World Wide Web page and should containthe following components:  an introduction that engages the reader and states a  claim; one or two paragraphs providing background material,  such as information on relevant people, places, events, and definitions; several paragraphs that support the claim with material  gathered from research on primary sources, such as interviews or surveys,  as well as properly cited material from at least two scholarly sources; a conclusion that leaves the reader feeling enlightened  and satisfied; a list of works cited conforming to MLA format; links to other relevant, credible World Wide Web sites  if any are available.   Portfolio (20 points) When you invest a large portion of your time and energyin a class for several weeks, you should expect something more than a gradein return. If you work hard in this course, you can receive a good grade,but you also can receive several other, more lasting and important benefits,including a foundation of knowledge and skills. To strengthen this foundation,you will prepare a language portfolio with the following components:  a 250-word introductory essay highlighting the most important  material you learned in the course and explaining the relevance of this  material to your life, studies, or career; all of your notes, exercises, quizzes, bibliographies,  and printouts, separated by dividers into the categories of history, phonology,  morphology, lexicon, syntax, semantics, psycholinguistics, and sociolinguistics; printouts of your group's World Wide Web page and your  analytical essay; concise captions in which you reflect on what you learned  from studying each component of the language and from creating the World  Wide Web page and article.  I hope that this portfolio's value to you will outlastthis semester and that you will continue to consult it and add to it asyou encounter language in the years to come. You may even want to show itto friends, parents, prospective employers, and--someday--grandchildrento demonstrate all that you have learned this semester about language andlife. Updated August 17, 1999 | University of North Carolina at Pembroke © Mark Canada,1999 | canada@sassette.uncp.edu   