

 General Chemistry II Syllabus




General Chemistry II
V25.0102

Spring 2001

Prof. John M. Halpin
1018A Main Building
(212) 998-8418
Office Hours:
M, T, W 12:00-1:00 p.m.






V25.0102General Chemistry II
Course Schedule and Outline




Lectures:Section 001Time:T, Th 8:00-9:15 a.m.Room:200 Cantor
Section 002Time:T, Th 9:30-10:45 a.m.Room:200 Cantor





DATEDAY
CHAP.TOPIC
Jan. 16T
11
Intermolecular Forces, Liquids, and Solids
Jan. 18Th
11
Intermolecular Forces, Liquids, and Solids
Jan. 23T
13
Properties of Solutions
Jan. 25Th
13
Properties of Solutions
Jan. 30T
13
Properties of Solutions
Feb. 1Th
14
Chemical Kinetics
Feb. 6T
14
Chemical Kinetics
Feb. 8Th
14, 15
Chemical Kinetics; Chemical Equilibrium
Feb. 13T
15
Chemical Equilibrium
Feb. 15Th
15
Chemical Equilibrium
Feb. 16F
 
Exam 1 (chaps. 11, 13-15)
Feb. 20T
16
Acid-Base Equilibria
Feb. 22Th
16
Acid-Base Equilibria
Feb. 27T
16
Acid-Base Equilibria
Mar. 1Th
17
Additional Aspects of Equilibria
Mar. 6T
17
Additional Aspects of Equilibria
Mar. 8Th
17
Additional Aspects of Equilibria
  
 
Spring Recess (Mar. 12-16)
Mar. 20T
17
Additional Aspects of Equilibria
Mar. 22Th
19
Chemical Thermodynamics
Mar. 27T
19
Chemical Thermodynamics
Mar. 29Th
19
Chemical Thermodynamics
Mar. 30F
 
Exam 2 (chaps. 15-17, 19)
Apr. 3T
19
Chemical Thermodynamics
Apr. 5Th
20
Electrochemistry
Apr. 10T
20
Electrochemistry
Apr. 12Th
20
Electrochemistry
Apr. 17T
20, 21
Electrochemistry; Nuclear Chemistry
Apr. 19Th
21
Nuclear Chemistry
Apr. 24T
21
Nuclear Chemistry
Apr. 26Th
21
Nuclear Chemistry
May 9W
 
Final Exam (chaps. 11, 13-17, 19-21)



General Information


Registration:


To receive credit for this course, you must register and attend three (3) sections.  The purpose of each is discussed below.  The sections are:

a lecture section (sects. 001-002)
a recitation section (sects. 003-021)
a clinic section (sects. 022-046)  (also known as "workshops")

None of these are optional!


A laboratory requirement is fulfilled by registering for and attending the General Chemistry II Laboratory (V25.0104) course (a separate, 2-credit course).


Materials:


The required materials for this course are:

Textbook - Chemistry: The Central Science, 8th Ed., by Brown, LeMay, and Bursten
Scientific Calculator - Your calculator must be capable of evaluating logarithms, performing exponentiation, and calculating trigonometric functions.  It must have at least an eight-digit display and you must be able to switch between scientific notation and decimal notation.  Most standard scientific calculators have these features and they are priced as low as $20.

The recommended materials are:

Solutions to Red Exercises (to accompany Chemistry: The Central Science), by Wilson



Lectures:


Since this is the second semester of General Chemistry, most of you are no doubt already aware of the purpose of the
lecture class.  As during the last term, (slightly) abridged copies of the lecture notes will be sold by Unique Copy on Green
Street.  For those of you new to my course, let me explain that I provide these lecture notes because the large class sizes
forces me to use a computer display rather than a blackboard and you cannot copy everything as fast as it appears.  However, a
LOT more is said in lecture than appears on the handout, there are BIG margins on the handout, and you SHOULD write
notes in them.  If you don't, you'll have less information when you study and you might need that extra information when
exam time arrives.  Taking notes will keep you more alert during lecture too.  The notes do not replace the lecture.  If you do
not attend the lecture, you will miss material and it is therefore less likely that you will excel in the course.



Last semester, our coverage of the material differed slightly from the text for certain topics.  You can expect more of
that this term, especially in the equilibrium chapter (though the difference is one of "convention" - the book is
chemically/physically correct for that topic and you should still read it).  You are responsible for everything covered in
lecture, according to the methods and the conventions used in the lecture, as well as for all material in the text unless I
specifically tell you to omit a portion of the text.  Where the notes differ from the text, follow the notes.



The lectures are very large in this course.  This should be no surprise to you since this is a very big university.  The
large lecture environment requires self-discipline on your part.  If you talk to your neighbor during the lecture, I will probably
never notice, so that you'll "get away with it."  Your neighbors will certainly notice though, and it will make it difficult for
them to listen to the lecture.  If you have ever been annoyed by people distracting you during the lecture, please keep that in
mind and save your conversation for after class.


The Course Web Page:


There will be a page for this course within the NYU World Wide Web site.  The URL to use is
http://www.nyu.edu/classes/inorg

An account with the NYU Academic Computing Facility (ITS) has been established for each student in the course so that you will be able to access an appropriate computer even if you do not own one.



The web page will contain the syllabus (i.e., this document), the names of the recitation instructors and contact
information, the homework assignment list, numerical answers to the most recent homework assignment, links to www sites
that may help you with the course, and, most importantly, a list of class announcements.  In this last item, I will post
information about the course that you need to know, such as what is available on reserve at Bobst, which lecture notes are
available, which sets of homework answers are available, etc.  I'll keep it up to date and it will be a lot easier to access the
page than to find me, so you really ought to use it.

A note about e-mail: I do not object to receiving e-mail.  However, e-mail does not replace face-to-face conversation, it
is not appropriate for all types of questions/requests, and I do not enjoy typing lengthy answers.  There are definitely
occasions when communication by e-mail is the most convenient mode (for both of us) and there are times when it is not. 
For example, I will not send nor discuss grades by e-mail.  If you want my sympathy or need a favor, ask in person.  Before
sending a message, ask yourself if you would mind receiving such a message.  After considering these guidelines, if for a
particular situation you still think e-mail is the best option, then my address for this course is
genchem@halpinpc.chem.nyu.edu




Recitations:


While most questions can be asked in the lecture class, those requiring extensive answers or those that are not of
interest to the majority of the class should be posed during the recitation section.  Questions about homework problems are
also appropriate for recitations.  It is a good idea to write out your questions as they occur to you so that you do not forget to
ask them when you have the opportunity.



The recitation will include a 10 minute quiz (except during exam weeks).  Like last semester, the quizzes will be
partly problem solving and partly in multiple choice format.  When you do calculations you
 must show your work.  Partial
credit will be awarded where merited.



Transfers between recitation sections will be discouraged and will require written
 permission from me (Prof. Halpin).
There will be no transfers allowed during the first three weeks of the semester.  If after
 trying your section for
three class meetings you present a reasonable request for transfer, I will consider it.  Taking a quiz in another section to
replace a missed quiz or to avoid missing a quiz will also require written permission from
 me. Unauthorized transfers or
quizzes will result in no credit.  Most of the recitation sections are already filled to capacity and these restrictions are necessary
to preserve the "small class" format.



Clinics:


The workshops or clinics are intended to be another "small class" environment, with a less formal and more
interactive atmosphere than is found in recitations.  The specific format of the clinic is
 left up to the individual instructors.  I
would like the clinics to employ "cooperative learning".  That means that your section should be broken into small groups.
The members of a group openly discuss the assigned problems and solve them together.  The instructor serves as a moderator
and expert.  However, if your instructor and the majority of your section prefer another format, that is ok.  Follow the format
selected by your instructor.  If you don't like it, talk to the instructor about it.  If you need to transfer, the rules are the same
as for the recitations: no transfers for three weeks and permission is required.



As you probably know, clinic attendance and participation are worth up to 40 points toward your grade.  That
number of points can mean the difference between at least one, and often two, letter grades.  To attend and participate is
definitely worth your while.  The emphasis on participation is to remind you that the instructors should not, and will not,
grant full credit for a class meeting unless you make some contribution to the class.  Raise your hand and ask questions or
answer questions; get involved.  You'll get more than just the points if you do!



A clinic week starts on Friday and ends on the following Thursday.  If you need to
 make up a clinic (max. of two
makeups) then you must arrange to do so during the same clinic week.  If you don't do that, you'll need medical
documentation or you will forfeit the points for that week.  Clinics start on Friday, Jan.
 26 and end on Thursday, April 26.
There will be no clinic held during the week following an exam (Feb. 16-22, Mar. 30-Apr. 5).



Problem Sets:


Homework will be collected and credit will be given for answering the problems.  It will not be corrected for errors
because your instructor will not have time to do so.  As during the Fall semester, numerical answers to the homework
problems will be shown on the course webpage.  This is so that you can decide if your answer is correct or not.  If it is not
correct, and you do not know how to correct it, ask about that problem in your next recitation class.  Do not try to obtain
copies of the complete solutions because, while they might make perfect sense once you see
 them, you will not gain
anything from the problem unless you work it out yourself.



The homework is worth 20 points of your grade.  In most cases, that is one letter grade range.  It is valuable
pointwise and it is the only way for you to learn the skills necessary to demonstrate to us on quizzes and exams that you
understand chemistry.  Homework assignments and due dates will be given at the first lecture and will appear on the course
webpage (if due dates are changed, the webpage will be updated).


Missed Quizzes and Exams:


A quiz or a midterm exam missed for medical reasons will not count against you if you provide verifiable
documentation written on a physician's stationery.  All such documentation must be given to Prof. Halpin.  Recitation
instructors will not accept these documents and cannot excuse your absence without my approval.  Any piece of
documentation should include your name and the dates to which it applies as part of the physician's entry.  You should add
to the document exactly what sort of work you missed (i.e., exam or quiz) and which recitation section you attend.
A mid-term exam cannot be "made-up" at all (no makeups!) and quizzes may be replaced only during
 the same week (and with
permission), but for excused absences your grade will be calculated so that the missed work does not detract from your grade.
No more than one (1) midterm exam may be missed.  If you miss both midterms or if you miss
 the final exam (and have
medical documentation) you will be given a grade of incomplete (I).  You can then replace the missing work when the course
is given in the summer (late June thru early August) or in Spring 2002.



If you miss a clinic due to illness, you must make it up if it is possible to do so.  The only way that you would
not be able to do so would be if you were ill from the day of your clinic right through to
 the end of that clinic week and had
documentation to prove it.  If your return to classes before a clinic week ends, then make
 up the clinic that you
missed.  No kidding!!!  Do not come to me 2 weeks later and tell me that you didn't know that you had to make up a clinic!
I will simply refer you to this paragraph of the syllabus.



If you have a Wednesday recitation and miss a quiz, or if you know in advance that
 you will miss a Friday recitation,
then you can obtain written permission from Prof. Halpin to take the quiz, for that occasion, in another section.  If you need
to attend a different clinic for one week, you may obtain permission from Cesar Grullon or
 Julie Kaplan (in 1001 Main) to
attend an alternate section at which you must get written verification from the instructor
 that you attended and participated.



Conduct:


When I catch a student cheating they receive an automatic F for the course and they are reported to the dean of their
school.  This happened in the Fall 1997, Spring 1998, and Spring 2000 terms.  The only sure way to avoid this is: do not
cheat.  Most students would not even consider cheating.  However, if you are thinking about it, consider the consequences.



Students with Disabilities:


If you have a documented disability, you can arrange to take quizzes and/or exams at the Center for Students with
Disabilities, on the 4th Floor of 240 Greene Street.  It is your responsibility to make arrangements with that office and with
me before the first quiz or exam.



Religious Holidays:


If you have a religious obligation that prevents you from attending, I recognize your right to miss class.  The
procedure for a quiz or exam missed because of a religious commitment is similar to that for medical excuses, except that you
can write the documentation.  Please specify the date of the absence, the reason (i.e., what holiday), and give the section
number for your recitation.  Clinics missed for religious reasons must be made-up.  Therefore, you should speak with Cesar
Grullon or Julie Kaplan (1001 Main) in advance and they will arrange an alternate clinic for you to attend that week.



Grading:


You will be graded according to a fixed point scale.  There are no curves, there is no reason to compete with your colleagues, and you might all get A's if the grades are high!  The point values for the course components are:



QUIZZES..........60 points
HOMEWORK..........20 points
CLINICS..........40 points
EXAM 1..........90 points
(Fri., Feb. 16)
EXAM 2..........90 points
(Fri., Mar. 30)
FINAL EXAM..........100 points
(Wed., May 9)
TOTAL..........400 points


The grading scheme will be:


370-400..........A
350-369..........A-
330-349..........B+
305-329..........B
285-304..........B-
265-284..........C+
240-264..........C
220-239..........C-
200-219..........D
< 200..........F



I reserve the right to lower the cutoff numbers (making it easier), but I will not raise them.  However, don't count on them changing at all.



last updated 9:25 pm, Wednesday, Jan. 10, 2001


 


