


Language and Gender Syllabus


ENGL 473 : LANGUAGE AND GENDER
Gail Stygall                              
 Email:stygall@u.washingtion.edu 
 Readings Packet
 Cameron, Deborah, ed. The Feminist Critique of Language: A Reader. London: Routledge, 1990.
    Cameron, Deborah. Feminism and Linguistic Theory. 2nd ed. New York:St. Martin's, 1990. 
    Moi, Toril. Sexual/Textual Politics. London: Routledge, 1985.
    Tannen, Deborah, ed. Gender and Conversational Interaction. New York:
         Oxford UP, 1993.
   DESCRIPTION:
    
         This course will consider the implications of the social construction of gender in language,
         through an introductory survey of the empirical and theoretical work in feminist linguistics, as
         well as consider some of the preliminary work now being done in language and sexual
         orientation. The empirical segment, carried out during the first half of the quarter, will include
         readings and a primary research project in which students will collect conversational or survey
         data in support of hypotheses about the interaction of language and gender. Topics will include
         how women are socialized into language and how they learn language roles, how gender figures
         in conversational settings for adults, at play and at work, how publishing has served to reinforce
         gender variation in the written language, and language and sexual orientation, a final topic that
         will help complicate the simple polarized views of male-female in early empirical research on
         language and gender. In the second half of the course, we will turn to theoretical discussions of
         language and gender, and rethink the empirical projects through the lens of theory. We will begin
         with readings on some of the radical feminist linguists, including Dale Spender, Julia Penelope,
         and Mary Daly, as well as Cameron's readings of the radical feminist linguists. We will move to
         the French theorists, reading Cixous, Irigaray, and Kristeva, as well as Toril Moi's readings of
         those theorists. Course requirements include an early in the quarter report on a work from the
         supplemental reading list, two major papers, one on the empirical project, the other on a
         theoretical perspective, a brief classroom presentation, and a weekly dialogue journal to be shared
         and responded to alternating between a peer in one week and the course instructor the next week.
         
 This course requires everyone's consistent participation in the readings and in the various
         projects assigned. In addition to that basic factor, each of you will be required to do all of the
      following:


     
 DIALOGUE JOURNAL (25%)
         You will be keeping a dialogue journal, a record of your readings of the course materials.
         Due each week, I am expecting a summarization and personal
	evaluation/reaction to be written in journal form (not graded,
	not to be edited for form) of approximately 2-3 handwritten
	pages. You will need to purchase a hardcover composition book
	and divide each page in half. You will write your journal
	entry each week down the left half of each page; your response
	will alternate between one of your classmates for one week and
	me in the subsequent week. As a respondent to the dialogue
	journal, you may write in agreement with the original writer,
	disagreement, give examples or counterexamples, provide other
	readings--just about anything as long as it is in reaction to
	what the original writer produced. Your faithful participation
	is necessary for the dialogue journals to be of best
	use. Respondents must reply in the journal from one class
	meeting to the next, so you must always make arrangements to
	get the journal back to the writer each time, even if an
	emergency prevents you from attending class.
  REPORT ON AN ENTRY ON THE SUPPLEMENTAL READING LIST (15%) This
    requirement is a summary/evaluation project in which you are to
    write a 2-3 typed page summary and evaluation of a source article
    or book chapter on the supplemental reading list. Because I cannot
    possibly require reading as extensive as the research and
    scholarship in the area, each of you will contribute to the
    collective knowledge of the class, by writing your report and
    providing copies of the report to the entire class. This
    assignment will be due on January 24.
  EMPIRICAL PROJECT REPORTS (40%) With the focus on
	empirical data during the first half of the quarter, you will
	also be divided up into research teams to collect data on
	language and gender. Each group is to collect data in two
	ways: tape-recording any naturally occuring language event and
	by developing and administering a survey on language attitudes
	or practices. Each group member must tape-record a natural
	language event (a telephone conversation, a date, a class, a
	meal at home, all with the permission of participants) and to
	develop  a questionnaire to be given. The group will decide
         collectively on a tape-recording to analyze and a
	questionnaire  to be given. The group will
         analyze the same tape as a group and will pool all
	questionnaire data.  Each group member,
         however, will write her or his own paper, analyzing the tape,
	the questionnaire data, or both, with
         gender as the key analytic category. Transcripts of
	conversations and summaries of  questionnaire
         data should be aggregated in appendices, though you will of course want to quote briefly from
         transcripts or discuss parts of the questionnaire data in the body of the paper itself. I will expect
         this paper to be in the 8-10 page range, as this is your major paper for the course. This paper will
         be due on February 21.
  THEORY REPORT (20%)
         As a final project and requirement, I am asking that you explore the work of a feminist
         language theorist beyond the course readings, perhaps reading all of Dale Spender's Man Made
         Langauge or Julia Kristeva's Revolution in Poetiic Language, or anyone else you care to propose.
         This paper should advance an argument about why this theorist is important to understanding
         the issues involved in language and gender. This paper may be shorter, in the 3-5 typewritten
         pages, and it will be due on Monday, March 13 by 5:00 p.m.
 
  
         Jan 3 Introduction/Housekeeping
         Jan 5 Language Attitudes/Empirical Research &
                  Disciplines/Feminist Epistemologies
         
         Jan 10 Empirical Projects
         Jan 12 Early Language Socialization
         
         Jan 17 Early Language Socialization
         Jan 19 Adults in Conversation
         
         Jan 24 Adults in Conversation
                SUPPLEMENTAL READING REPORTS DUE
         Jan 26 Other Research in Language and Gender
         
         Jan 31 Other Research in Language and Gender
         Feb 2 Language and Sexual Orientation
         
         Feb 7 Language and Sexual Orientation
         Feb 9 Linguistics/Structuralism/PostStructuralism/Postmodernism
         
         Feb 14 Radical Feminist Linguistics
         Feb 16 Radical Feminist Linguistics
         
         Feb 21 Cixous
                EMPIRICAL PROJECT REPORTS DUE
         Feb 23 Irigaray
         
         Feb 28    Kristeva
         Mar 2   Kristeva
         
         Mar 7 Brief Theory Presentations
         Mar 9 Brief Theory Presentations
       
         Mar 13 THEORY PAPERS DUE BY 5:00 P.M.
         
        
       


