


A Question about Methodology (response by Stowe)





 
  


Interroads Discussion List


A Question about Methodology
Response by David Stowe, University of Doshisha, Japan


Interroads
Table of Contents
3. This thread contains an essay by Vernon
Pedersen
Invited Responses from:

Blair
Budianta 
Mintz
Stowe

List Responses from:

Carner
Finlay
Stowe
Zwick
Linke
Lauter
Horwitz 
Lauter (2)
Kaenel

Counterresponse from Vernon
Pedersen
Postscripts from:

Lauter
Horwitz
Stowe
Morreale

Addenda:
Syllabus, The
Americas: Identity, Culture and Power (Mintz)
Syllabus, Introduction
to American Studies (Lauter)
[David Stowe received his Ph.D. in American Studies from Yale University
in 1993. He has taught in the Department of American Thought and Language
at Michigan State University and is currently an associate professor in
the Graduate School of American Studies at Doshisha University in Kyoto.
Stowe is the author of Swing Changes: Big- Band Jazz in New Deal America
(Harvard, 1994).]
I am grateful to have the opportunity to respond to Vernon Pedersen's
piece on the challenge of developing a new American Studies Program at the
American University of Bulgaria. It seemed about time to come down off the
mountaintop of metacritique and engage more squarely the sort of decisions
and dilemmas that we face regularly in our teaching, research and writing.
It's never a bad thing to be warned away from totalizing discourses, monoculturalism,
inadvertent cultural imperialism and other hegemonic discourse-crimes. Despite
this minefield we still have to find ways to communicate with our students
on a day-to-day basis, sometimes in very basic ways. Some of our discussion
here has been conducted in a shorthand of rhetorical winks and nods that
occasionally make it difficult to be sure what's at stake or, occasionally,
exactly what is being argued for or against.
Like AUBG, the Graduate School of American Studies at Doshisha is a relatively
new program. Founded in 1991, the Graduate School offers the only Ph.D.
program for American Studies in Japan and is under some pressure to produce
actual Ph.D.s; a few students are in the middle of dissertations. With a
core faculty that includes a diplomatic historian, an international economist,
a scholar of Constitutional law, an expert on literature and painting, and
a specialist in race and ethnicity, the question of method has been quite
tricky. I can sympathize with Pedersen's report that "Early discussions
of the subject were not encouraging and at one point the committee even
came close to convincing itself that crafting an interdisciplinary major
was impossible."
Until now the required Introduction to American Studies has been team
taught, with each faculty member teaching a three-week unit in his specialization.
With little effort made to integrate the various units, some students and
faculty felt this yielded a fragmented and disorienting introduction to
the field. As part of a significant revamping of the curriculum just completed,
next year will inaugurate an approach very much like the one Pedersen describes.
We will take up a single theme or issue--probably something like wvhat is
an American? (totalizing as this sounds)--on which faculty members will
conduct a series of two- or three-week mini-courses that tackle this issue
from their respective disciplinary perspectives: how the question could
be answered through the study of literature, in terms of the Constitution,
through economics, in terms of diplomatic history, popular culture, race
and ethnicity, and so on. The thought was that by holding one variable constant
(the theme of the course), differences in methodogies would be highlighted.
The two themes under consideration at AUBG, the Civil War and Religion
in America, seem appropriate, especially considering the charge that American
Studies has consistently downplayed the significance of religion in national
life. After years of difficulty with its junior seminar for American Studies
majors, Yale also settled on the Civil War as its organizing theme, but
I'm not sure if that's still the case. Both themes reflect a more humanities-centric
approach than would be popular among faculty here. Since Professor Pedersen
writes somewhat apologetically of this approach as representing a return
to the 1950s roots of American Studies, I'd be interested to hear if other
programs have adopted a more methodologically daring approach. What's the
alternative to going back to the future?
Then there's the thesis issue. All applicants to Doshisha are expected
to prepare and answer questions about a thesis proposal, which can be a
significant factor in decisions about admission. Matriculants have the option
of taking additional course credits in lieu of submitting a thesis but are
encouraged to write the thesis. The problem becomes how to prod students
toward this major research project while simultaneously "filling in"
remarkably uneven backgrounds in American history and culture--not to mention
varying English abilities. In other words, students are pushed to both specialize
and broaden their horizons while at the same time adjusting to an entirely
different classroom culture and learning new communication skills.
The question of establishing the core course and administering educational
"shock therapy" to unsuspecting students raises a bigger issue
for members of this discussion group. American Studies for what? I would
guess that there are big differences on this point between U.S. and non-U.S.
American Studies programs, especially at the graduate level (Doshisha does
not offer American Studies to undergraduates). In the U.S., despite some
desperate casting about of late for alternative careers prompted by the
ongoing employment crisis, the prevailing expectation is that graduate students
are headed for teaching careers. At least, faculty generally proceed under
the assumption that their coursework should be directed toward developing
new scholars, i.e. replicating themselves.
At Doshisha the expectation is different; most graduates will pursue
careers in business, journalism, government, etc. The question on people's
minds here is: what can this program offer students that makes the time
and expense worthwhile? What marketable skills and knowledge can this extremely
variegated faculty impart? There is a sense here that American Studies is
viewed with some skepticism by the university and must justify itself in
some tangible way. Doshisha's program would like to leave some kind of distinctive
imprint on its students, a sort of "product brand." But given
the far-flung specializations of faculty and dispirate fields into which
graduates are prepared, it becomes difficult to imagine just what such an
imprint should entail. Hence the difficulty at arriving at a methodological
core course. In this sense the program here might better be described as
an area studies program focused on the U.S. rather than an American program
where the humanities remain the center of activity. Add to this the complicating
fact that habits of interpretation, analysis and critical thought prized
by many practitioners of American Studies are not ones that have been particularly
sought after by corporations or bureaucracies here or in most other parts
of the world.
Another conundrum faced at Doshisha and probably by many other non-U.S.
programs as well is the role of Engish language in the curriculum. This
issue crops up in a variety of forms, from what minimal TOEFL or TOEIC scores
should be expected of incoming students, to whether courses or theses should
be prepared in English or Japanese, to the extent to which faculty meetings
are conducted in English. Clearly this can be argued both ways: the use
of English in a non-U.S. American Studies program can be seen as yet another
manifestation of American hegemony but also as one of the essential marketable
skills that such a program ought to provide. To my knowledge little discussion
of this question has taken place here. The majority of faculty have a near-native
fluency in English, so it's not a question of a comfort level in a second
language. Does the fact that I can speak only rudimentary Japanese (for
now) disqualify me from questioning why so little of the business of our
program takes place in English? I don't think so.

David W. Stowe
  University of Doshisha, Japan
  Email: dstowe@mail.doshisha.ac.jp






Communities
| Curriculum
| Technology
& Learning | Reference
& Research
Crossroads home
page | About
Crossroads | What's
New | Visitors'
Book
This section last updated September 1997. Please
send comments to Crossroads
Webstaff.



