

EMS Paramedic Program Information Page
















Information 
        Page 
Paramedic 
        Functional Job Analysis
Other 
        Program Information 
Use 
        LINKS below

Program 
          of Study | FAQs | Prerequisites 
          | Syllabus | Contact 
          Us | Links Page | Program 
          Application
 
 





Paramedic Characteristics
The Paramedic must be a confident 
        leader who can accept the challenge and high degree of responsibility 
        entailed in the position. The Paramedic must have excellent judgement 
        and be able to prioritize decisions and act quickly in the best interest 
        of the patient, must be self disciplined, able to develop patient rapport, 
        interview hostile patients, maintain safe distance, and recognize and 
        utilize communication unique to diverse multicultural groups and ages 
        within those groups. Must be able to function independently at optimum 
        level in a non-structured environment that is constantly changing. 
Even though the Paramedic is 
        generally part of a two- person team generally working with a lower skill 
        and knowledge level Basic EMT, it is the Paramedic who is held responsible 
        for safe and therapeutic administration of drugs including narcotics. 
        Therefore, the Paramedic must not only be knowledge about medications 
        but must be able to apply this knowledge in a practical sense. Knowledge 
        and practical application of medications include thoroughly knowing and 
        understanding the general properties of all types of drugs including analgesics, 
        anesthetics, anti-anxiety drugs, sedatives and hypnotics, anti-convulsants, 
        central nervous stimulants, psychotherapeutics which include antidepressants, 
        and other anti-psychotics, anticholerginics, cholergenics, muscle relaxants, 
        anti-dysrythmics, anti-hypertensives, anticoagulants, diuretics, bronchodilators, 
        opthalmics, pituitary drugs, gastro-intestinal drugs, hormones, antibiotics, 
        antifungals, antiinflammatories, serums, vaccines, anti-parasitics, and 
        others. 
The Paramedic is personally 
        responsible, legally, ethically, and morally for each drug administered, 
        for using correct precautions and techniques, observing and documenting 
        the effects of the drugs administered, keeping one's own pharmacological 
        knowledge- base current as to changes and trends in administration and 
        use, keeping abreast of all contraindications to administration of specific 
        drugs to patients based on their constitutional make-up, and using drug 
        reference literature. 
The responsibility of the Paramedic 
        includes obtaining a comprehensive drug history from the patient that 
        includes names of drugs, strength, daily usage and dosage. The Paramedic 
        must take into consideration that many factors, in relation to the history 
        given, can affect the type medication to be given. For example, some patients 
        may be taking several medications prescribed by several different doctors 
        and some may lose track of what they have or have not taken. Some may 
        be using non-prescription/over the counter drugs. Awareness of drug reactions 
        and the synergistic effects of drugs combined with other medicines and 
        in some instances, food, is imperative. The Paramedic must also take into 
        consideration the possible risks of medication administered to a pregnant 
        mother and the fetus, keeping in mind that drugs may cross the placenta. 
        
The Paramedic must be cognizant 
        of the impact of medications on pediatric patients based on size and weight, 
        special concerns related to newborns, geriatric patients and the physiological 
        effects of aging such as the way skin can tear in the geriatric population 
        with relatively little to no pressure. There must be an awareness of the 
        high abuse potential of controlled substances and the potential for addiction, 
        therefore, the Paramedic must be thorough in report writing and able to 
        justify why a particular narcotic was used and why a particular amount 
        was given. The ability to measure and re-measure drip rates for controlled 
        substances/medications is essential. Once medication is stopped or not 
        used, the Paramedic must send back unused portions to proper inventory 
        arena.
 The Paramedic must be able 
        to apply basic principles of mathematics to the calculation of problems 
        associated with medication dosages, perform conversion problems, differentiate 
        temperature reading between centigrade and Fahrenheit scales, be able 
        to use proper advanced life support equipment and supplies ( i.e. proper 
        size of intravenous needles ) based on patient's age and condition of 
        veins, and be able to locate sites for obtaining blood samples and perform 
        this task, administer medication intravenously, administer medications 
        by gastric tube, administer oral medications, administer rectal medications, 
        and comply with universal pre-cautions and body substance isolation, disposing 
        of contaminated items and equipment properly. 
The Paramedic must be able 
        to apply knowledge and skills to assist overdosed patients to overcome 
        trauma through antidotes, and have knowledge of poisons and be able to 
        administer treatment. The Paramedic must be knowledgeable as to the stages 
        drugs/medications go through once they have entered the patient's system 
        and be cognizant that route of administration is critical in relation 
        to patient's needs and the effect that occurs. 
The Paramedic must also be 
        capable of providing advanced life support emergency medical services 
        to patients including conducting of and interpreting electrocardiograms 
        (EKGs), electrical interventions to support the cardiac functions, performing 
        advanced endotracheal intubations in airway management and relief of pneumothorax 
        and administering of appropriate intravenous fluids and drugs under direction 
        of off-site designated physician. 
The Paramedic is a person who 
        must not only remain calm while working in difficult and stressful circumstances, 
        but must be capable of staying focused while assuming the leadership role 
        inherent in carrying out the functions of the position. Good judgement 
        along with advanced knowledge and technical skills are essential in directing 
        other team members to assist as needed. The Paramedic must be able to 
        provide top quality care, concurrently handle high levels of stress, and 
        be willing to take on the personal responsibility required of the position. 
        This includes not only all legal ramifications for precise documentation, 
        but also the responsibility for using the knowledge and skills acquired 
        in real life threatening emergency situations. 
The Paramedic must be able 
        to deal with adverse and often dangerous situations which include responding 
        to calls in districts known to have high crime and mortality rates. Self-confidence 
        is critical, as is a desire to work with people, solid emotional stability, 
        a tolerance for high stress, and the ability to meet the physical, intellectual, 
        and cognitive requirements demanded by this position.
Physical Demands

        Aptitudes required for work of this nature are good physical stamina, 
        endurance, and body condition that would not be adversely affected by 
        frequently having to walk, stand, lift, carry, and balance at times, in 
        excess of 125 pounds. Motor coordination is necessary because over uneven 
        terrain, the patient's, the Paramedic's, and other workers' well being 
        must not be jeopardized. 
Comments

        The Paramedic provides the most extensive pre-hospital care and may work 
        for fire departments, private ambulance services, police departments or 
        hospitals. Response times for nature of work are dependent upon nature 
        of call. For example, a Paramedic working for a private ambulance service 
        that transports the elderly from nursing homes to routine medical appointments 
        and check-ups may endure somewhat less stressful circumstances than the 
        Paramedic who works primarily with 911 calls in a districts known to have 
        high crime rates. Thus, the particular stresses inherent in the role of 
        the Paramedic can vary, depending on place and type of employment. 
The Paramedic must be flexible 
        to meet the demands of the ever-changing emergency scene. When emergencies 
        exists, the situation can be complex and care of the patient must be started 
        immediately. In essence, the Paramedic in the EMS system uses advanced 
        training and equipment to extend emergency physician services to the ambulance. 
        The Paramedic must be able to make accurate independent judgements while 
        following oral directives. The ability to perform duties in a timely manner 
        is essential, as it could mean the difference between life and death for 
        the patient. 
 
 
 
Home 
        | Students | Faculty 
        | Information






