


Social and Political Thought Syllabus - Henderson State University








Social and Political Thought

HIS 4173, 5173;
PSC 3073, 5073
"Whoever wants to know the heart and mind of America
had better learn baseball, the rules and realities of the game - and do it by
watching first some high school or small-town teams."
Jacques Barzun
Course Description
Every
four years, the attention of the country turns to one of the more compelling
aspects of the peculiar American experiment - the Election season. And, of
course, following upon the "interesting" season of Election 2000, this
promises to be an exciting year.  It is a fortuitous circumstance that the
course rotation dictates that we explore the foundational theories of Government
(Legitimate vs. Illegitimate Authority, Coercion), Human Rights (Who has them?
Who doesn't? Who decides?), Civil Rights, the role of Money in Politics, etc.
just as we are participating in the governing process that those theories
underpin. We will discuss the historical and philosophical background of the
U.S. Constitution (with special attention paid to the Bill of Rights -
particularly the First and Second Amendments).  We will discuss views of
Individual Rights, Just Government, the Role of Government in society, the
proper extent of Governmental influence, States Rights, and other pertinent
topics. And we will discuss how those foundational notions of democracy,
representative government, rights, and all the rest are employed, neglected,
ignored, and exalted in the actual practice of politics and civil
discourse.  That is to say, we will discuss POLITICS - its practice, its
abuses, its current state.  There are several texts required for the course
and several others recommended.
Required Texts

Matalin and Carville, All's Fair
Durand, Sidgwick's Utility and Whitehead's Virtue
Arthur, Social and Political Philosophy
Recommended Texts
 John Stuart Mill, On Liberty and Other
Essays
 John Locke, Second Treatise on Government 
Carville, We're Right and They're Wrong
Simmons, A Lockean Theory of Rights 
 Kavka, Hobbesian Moral and Political Philosophy 
Waldron, Theories of Rights 
 Sreenivasan, The Limits of Lockean
Rights in Property 
Machiavelli, Selected Political Writings
Course Requirements
1. Weekly Papers:
15% - This course is designed to function in seminar style. Accordingly, the
participation of each student is critical. Students are to write weekly papers
in response to assigned weekly readings.  The readings over which the
papers can be written will be assigned in advance.  Late papers will
NOT be accepted, so it is important to
remain current in the class.  Students are responsible for 7 weekly papers
over the course of the semester. The content of the papers are to include
responses to the following questions: What is the thesis?  What is the
argument or defense of the thesis?  What is your reasoned view of the
thesis and accompanying argument.  The papers are to be TYPED,
double-spaced, with reasonable margins (1" or so).  They should be 3-5
pages (or between 750 and 1250 words).  They should include a title page
that includes the following information - title, author's name, class,
professor, date submitted, and a word count.  Consult the style
sheet for citation information.
2. Focus Papers:
20% - One of the important aspects of the philosophical discipline is developing
the skill to write thoughtful papers that analyze arguments and counterarguments
in the field.  Over the course of the semester, 5 readings will be assigned
for the student to write focus papers.  Students will be responsible for 4
papers (hence, not responsible for 1). If a student writes all 5 papers, I will
count the best 4.  The papers are actually larger versions of the weekly
papers and should include responses to the following questions: What is the
thesis?  What are the main opposing theses?  What is the argument for
the thesis?  What are the arguments against the thesis?
3.
Mid-Term Exam: 15% - There will be a take-home
mid-term exam.  It will be distributed some three weeks before it is
due.  It will be helpful to consult the online schedule for reminders andcolor
updates.
4.
Paper: 30% - In
Social and Political Thought, these papers are directed at
foundational issues in the arenas of law, government, rights, human nature, etc.
The papers are to be 10-12 TYPED pages (no more, perhaps less); written in  APA
style. Two copies of the paper are to be turned during the 10th week
of class. The papers will be returned, with comments, during the 12th
week of class. The papers are to be re-written, in light of the commentary, and
given to the professor during the last week of class.
5.
Final Exam: 20% - The final exam is a comprehensive
essay exam over the material covered throughout the course.  A series of
potential questions will be distributed to the students at least a week before
the final exam.  A set of those questions will comprise the final exam and
the students will be responsible for a subset of those questions on the
exam.  The exact numbers both of questions on the exam and of the questions
for which the students will be responsible is to be determined.

Reasonable Writing Proficiency:

It is generally presumed that
students in Social and Political Thought (a Junior/Senior level class) have
developed the ability to write proficiently.  Spelling, grammar, proper
citation of outside sources, and proper scholarly style are all expected. 
For reference, students may follow this link to
the expected format for citation.  Students are strongly encouraged to
visit the Writing Center on the first
floor of McBrien Hall.  The Writing
Center is staffed by extremely helpful people who have strong backgrounds in
writing.  They will be able to help the student to produce an acceptable
result.

Reasonable Accommodation Policy for Students

Please note that Henderson State
University has a policy of accommodating students with disabilities. If you have
a problem that may prevent you from fully demonstrating you abilities, you
should let me know as soon as possible.

Academic Misconduct

Cheating on tests,
plagiarizing from books or other students, are the most serious instances of
academic misconduct. Such behavior is very unethical. In addition, University
policy penalizes it severely.  Plagiarism and cheating will result in no
less than a grade of "F" for the assignment.  Potential
consequences of plagiarism include being dropped from the course with a grade of
"F" and/or being subject to proceedings that conclude in suspension
from the University.

Cell Phone/Pager Policy

The ringing of cell phones and pagers is extremely
disruptive to class activity.  For this reason, cell phones and pagers are
to be TURNED OFF before class begins.  A 10 point penalty will be assessed
for violations of this policy.
Other Salient Information
Instructor:  Kevin
K. J. Durand
Phone Number: (870) 230-5058
Office: McBrien Hall, Room 201c
Office Hours: MWF, 10-11; 2-2:30; TR, 11-12:30
E-mail: durandk@hsu.edu
Instant Messenger Handle: reddiephilosophy
     (both for Yahoo! and AOL)
Return to
Social and Political
Home

