


EDC 480--School and Society Course Syllabus








Main
| Course
Syllabus | Reserve
Readings | Learning
Analysis Journal
Educational
Philosophy Paper |
Miscellaneous
Course Handouts and Other Items of
Interest


EDC 480--School
and Society
Friday evenings 6:00 to 9:30 P.M.,
4 January to 5 April 2001 in SVE 17
1.0 course, WEC--Winter Trimester 2002






Instructor:





Joseph A. Erickson,
         Ph.D.




Office:





SVE 6 (lower level of
         Sverdrup Hall)




Communications:





(612) 330-1647 (office),
         (612) 330-1339 (facsimile), <!-- Original:  CDR Software --><!-- Web Site:  http://www.cdrsoft.com  --><!-- This script and many more are available free online at --><!-- The JavaScript Source!! http://javascript.internet.com --><!-- Begin

user = "erickson";
site = "augsburg.edu";

document.write('<a href=\"mailto:' + user + '@' + site + '\">');
document.write(user + '@' + site + '</a>');

// End -->
         (email)




Course web
         site:





http://blackboard.augsburg.edu/




Office
         hours:





Mondays 3:30-4:30 P.M. and
         WEC Fridays: 2:30-4:30 P.M. Call (612) 330-1130 to make an
         appointment.




Augsburg College Education Department Mission Statement: The
Augsburg College Education Department commits itself to developing
future educational leaders who foster student learning and well-being
by being knowledgeable in their fields, being capable in pedagogy,
being ethical in practice, nurturing self-worth, embracing diversity,
thinking reflectively, and collaborating effectively.
Course Objectives and
Orientation: This course will examine social and philosophical
forces impacting schools in modern American society. Students in this
course will develop and exhibit:




Knowledge
         of:


Skills in:
         


Professional attitudes
         related to:




philosophies of education
         


applying theory to solve
         practical problems 


critical
         self-reflection/examination




relevant history of American
         education 


analyzing social and
         philosophical forces


appreciating diverse
         learning styles




current issues impacting
         public schools


  shaping American
         education 


establishing a belief that
         all students can learn




future trends in American
         education


developing partnerships with
         parents


developing a foundation for
         leadership




standards of professional
         conduct










In-class instructional methods will include: Lecture, discussion,
demonstrations, simulations, student-led activities, cooperative
activities, and media showings. Each activity is crafted with an
appreciation for diverse learning styles based on temperament,
gender, and cultural/ethnic differences.
EDC 480
Course Objectives and Assignments Aligned with Minnesota Standards of
Effective Practice
Required Texts:

Glasser, W. (1992). The
   quality school. New York: Perennial Library.
Kohn, A. (1999). The schools
   our children deserve: Moving beyond traditional classrooms and
   "tougher standards." Boston: Houghton Mifflin Co.
Quinn, D. (1998). My Ishmael.
   New York: Bantam Books.
Additional reserve readings are
   required. These are on reserve in the library (see listing
   below).

Attendance Policy: Most of the
class demonstration sessions and films cannot be made up, it is
strongly recommended you attend all class meetings to insure you
don't miss any important material. If you must miss a class meeting,
please speak with the instructor ahead of time. Students may, with
the permission of the instructor, make-up unavoidable absences (e.g.,
illness or family emergency) by engaging in equivalent learning
activities which they must document for the instructor. Other
avoidable absences may not be made-up.
Honesty Policy: The Augsburg
College policy on academic honesty applies to this course. You will
be required to acknowledge your compliance with this policy.
Compliance procedures will be discussed further in class.
Grading Procedure: There are
several components to your grade for this course. They
include:

Course
   Readings: You have a
   choice regarding how you will document your learning from
   Glasser's The Quality School, Kohn's The Schools Our
   Children Deserve, Quinn's My Ishmael, and the other
   readings on reserve. You can either (a) prepare edited notes based
   on what you learn during your reading of the item(s), or (b)
   participate in a take-home essay examination.



Essay/Learning Notes:
      This involves either preparing typed and edited notes reviewing
      the concepts and skills covered in the course reading(s) or
      writing a brief essay about the item(s) read. The notes or
      essay should be written in such a way as to highlight your
      careful understanding, reflection, analysis, and evaluation of
      the concepts discussed in the texts, not simply copying what
      the book says. As with any written assignment, the notes or
      essay should display college-level writing skills (full
      sentences, good grammar, etc.). The notes or essay will be due
      at the beginning of class on the dates indicated below in the
      course schedule. Or


Essay Exam: Essay examinations
      covering all of the major concepts from 1) Glasser and Kohn,
      and 2) Quinn and the reserve readings will be administered. The
      exams are due at the beginning of class on the dates indicated
      in the course schedule.
In either case, you will be
      able to earn up to 30 points for these activities.




Learning
   Analysis Journals: Five
   typed, two page Learning Analysis Journals, in which you reflect
   on and analyze your experience(s) in K-12 schools using concepts
   drawn from this course (this will be discussed further in class),
   worth 6 points each,


Educational
   Philosophy Paper: An 8-10
   page documented statement of your educational philosophy and
   practice, worth 30 points, and


Task Management and
   Participation: If you successfully demonstrate
   professional-level task management and participate in all class
   meetings in an informed and enthusiastic manner, you will receive
   up to ten points, otherwise fewer or no points. (Class
   participation points can be earned only when a student attends
   class regularly.) Students may, with the permission of the
   instructor, make-up unavoidable absences (e.g., illness or family
   emergency) by engaging in equivalent learning activities which the
   student must design and document for the instructor. Other
   avoidable absences may not be made-up.

Those students who earn 96 points or
more on the exam and other assignments will receive a 4.0 for the
course. Similarly: 91-95 pts. = 3.5, 86-90 = 3.0, 81-85 = 2.5, 76-80
= 2.0, 71-75 = 1.5, 66-70 = 1.0, 61-65 = 0.5, & 0-60 =
0.0.
About Your Statement of
Educational Philosophy and Practice: In order to assist you in
critically analyzing and applying the different theories of education
to which you have been exposed during your teacher preparation, you
will write a statement of your educational philosophy. This paper
will be an integration and explanation of your educational philosophy
and its implications on your teaching practice. You should not need
to invent your own theory of education. This paper should focus on a
tight integration of a traditional Western educational philosophy
(i.e., progressivism, existentialism, perennialism, and essentialism)
and your personal application of this theory in your
classroom.
An alternate paper might develop the
rationale for a new school. This new school proposal needs to be
thoroughly grounded in a philosophical perspective and explained in
great detail. The school proposal should include: the school's
mission statement or vision, curriculum overview, approach to student
motivation, approaches to parent and community involvement, approach
to assessment and evaluation, and a plan for professional educator
development. The plan should also include an annotated
budget.
Whichever paper you write, it should
be approached as a summative critical integration of your teacher
preparation program. This paper (if done well) could be the
centerpiece of your teaching portfolio. It should display the
professionalism and clarity you would like to project in a job
interview.
Your theories of education will
undoubtedly change as you become more experienced, but this
experience will force you to make some choices and take a stand. Your
continued investigation of education will be enhanced by this road
map.
This paper will be 8-10 pages in
length, typed, double-spaced, and conform to American
Psychological Association (APA)
style. (APA is the standard
professional format for educators. The APA Publication Manual is
available in the reference section of the library.) The paper must
conform to APA format for bibliographic research, inclusive language,
documentation and professional style.
Portions or drafts of the paper will
be handed-in several times during the term to provide opportunities
for feedback at the pre-writing, drafting, revising and editing
stages of the writing process. It will be graded in two parts. First
your paper will be assessed with regards to its completeness and the
clarity of the ideas presented (20 points). Then the paper will be
evaluated with regards to its style (correct English usage, thematic
focus, APA style, etc., 10 points). Overall, the paper is worth 30
points. Because this class fulfills a writing graduation skills
requirement, it is required that you pass the writing assignment in
order to pass this course (whether or not you are completing your
bachelor's degree at Augsburg College).
Several documents which discuss how
to develop your paper will be distributed in class and
are available at this website.
Several in-class activities will also assist you in identifying and
developing your educational philosophy.
Late Work Policy: Course
assignments handed-in on time may be re-done for additional credit if
they are deficient in some way. On time means the assignment is
handed-in at the beginning of the class meeting indicated on the
course calendar--not later that day. Late assignments cannot be
re-done for extra credit.
Other Student Rights: Students
with diagnosed learning disabilities or physical handicaps may have
legal rights to course modifications. Please identify yourself to the
instructor so that he may assist you in reaching your learning goals.
All students have the right to use the Augsburg College Counseling
Center and Student Development staff services, as well as to receive
tutoring assistance from the Writing Lab.
Pre-Course Schedule (this
schedule may change due to media availability and other
considerations):




Date


Topic(s)


Reading Assignment
         (due by class time)




4
         Jan._


What Makes Excellent
         Schools?_







18
         Jan._


The Role of
         Students*_


Glasser, pp. 1-88




Jan. 21-29


Travel to Nicaragua (for
         those students who also signed-up for the CGE travel
         option)







1
         Feb._


The Role of Teachers
(Exam or Notes Due)
Minnesota Standards of Professional Conduct case study
         activity


Glasser, pp.
         89-167




15 Feb.


The Role of
         Parents*
Philosophy paper
         outline and early bibliography
         due_


Quinn, pp. 1-145




1 Mar.


The Role of the
         Community:

Asset Building and
         K-12 Education*


Quinn, pp.
         146-288




15 Mar.


Testing...Testing...Testing*
Educational
         philosophy paper first draft due


Kohn, Forward and Pt. 1
         (through pp. 113)




22 Mar.


The Factory Model of
         Schools:

Implications for
         School Change*


Kohn, Part 2 and Appendix A
         & B (pp. 115-237)




5 Apr.


Future Trends: What's in
         Store? (Exam or
         Notes Due)
Educational philosophy paper final draft
         due


Callahan, Jordan or Postman
         chapter


















*Learning Analysis Journals
         due at these class meetings







N.B.: The order and topics may change due to class needs and
media availabilities. Your reading and writing assignments are due at
the beginning of class on the date assigned. All assignments not
previously handed-in are due no later than 4:00
P.M.
on Tuesday, 10 April 2001. Any variance from this schedule must be
pre-arranged with the instructor.
Reserve
Readings:
(Available at the Reserve Desk, Augsburg Library)

The following book chapters and other resources are available on
reserve at the Lindell Library. These book chapters are required
reading for the course (each student should choose one chapter to
read) and should be included in your course notes or in your
preparations for examination.

Week 7: Choose one--Callahan, pp.
   vii-18, 126-147; Jordan pp. 3-109; or Postman, pp. 3-87)

Also on reserve: Educational
   Philosophy Paper Resources (example papers, outlines, source
   texts, and other resources)


 
"Do the best
you can. And so be judged."
Laurence Mikan, father of
NBA-great George Mikan




Main
| Course
Syllabus | Reserve
Readings | Learning
Analysis Journal
Educational
Philosophy Paper |
Miscellaneous
Course Handouts and Other Items of
Interest

 


