

Modern Political Theory















 [Contents]
 [Comment] 
 [Home Page] 
 [Index to Home Page]





Extended Learning  
School of Extended and Continuing Education    Western Illinois University              





Table of Contents          



Preface

Meet the Author
Student Information
Instructor
Course Materials
Syllabus:  Assignments, Examinations. Grades
Time Limits for Taking and Completing the Course
Withdrawals/Tuition Credit
Questions
Course Progress Record

Course Materials

Course Lectures and Discussion 
Course Materials for Modern Political Theory: Guidelines for Papers, Glossary, Bibliography, etc.
Syllabus:  Assignments, Examinations. Grades
Web Sites Linked to Modern Political Theory --Machiavelli to the Twentieth Century



Preface            


This is a Web page for a course on Modern Political Theory that will be taught solely over the World Wide Web and offered in the Spring of 1999.  If you peruse these pages you will find lectures, discussions of the subject matter, links to Web pages in Modern Political Theory, a bibliography of relevant books, a glossary, etc.  We will also be establishing discussion forums in the form of bulletin boards, email, and chat rooms.  We can also rely on the tried and true method of mail and telephone if all else fails (just kidding).  This is the second time that I have taught this course solely over the World Wide Web.  We will make extensive use of WebCT which should enhance discussion through Chat and Bulletin Boards.   I would also welcome suggestions all during the course if you wish to try some different things.  This is an experiment in learning and we all need to participarte if it is to be successful.   This is a work in progress so I will be updating it as we go along.
Welcome to your Independent Study course at Western Illinois
University.  The materials you are using have been prepared by
the university faculty especially for people like you who are
unable to attend courses on campus or at extension centers.  We
hope you will learn a great deal from the readings and find the
Course Guide helpful.


The information that follows is designed to assist you in
studying the material and sucessfully completing the course. 
Please read it carefully before you begin to study.




Meet the Faculty Member         



My name is Charles Helm.  I am professor of political science,
and department chair, at Western Illinois University in Macomb,
Illinois.  I have been at Western since 1972 and my degree is
from the University of North Carolina (UNC).  My wife also
attended UNC and also teaches political science at Western, with
a focus on comparative politics.  Our daughter works for the US
Navy, is married, and just has return to the US.  Our cat's name
is Theo.

I teach political theory -- modern and classical -- the
philosophy of the social sciences at the graduate level, politics
and film, American political thought, and the Internet and
Political Science.  My teaching load has been reduced while I
serve as department chair.

This will be the first course that I have taught solely on the
Web even while I have used computers extensively in my courses. 
The Internet and the World Wide Web are the most exciting
pedagogical and technological advance in education in the twenty
years that I have been teaching.  

The Internet and Web can also offer a real lesson in social and
civic responsibility in an age of aggressive individualism. 
While there is the obvious and disturbing constraint of access to
a computer and an Internet provider, for those who are on-line,
the Internet offers a corncuopia of information free for the
asking.  While my main research interest remain democratic theory
as it pertains to voting behavior and the Supreme Court, the Web
and Internet have become increasingly inportant as a research
area.  




Student Information   


Instructor
You have been assigned an instructor, a professor at Western
Illinois University, with whom you will be working.  His name,
campus mailing address, and phone number are indicated below. 
When you have questions or want to discuss your readings, please
write or call him.  If you live near the campus, you are
encouraged to arrange a visit with him.



Charles Helm

Department of Political Science

 Morgan Hall

Western Illinois University

1 University Circle

Macomb, IL  61455


You can reach your instructor at his office telephone--309/298-1055.  If there is no answer, you may call the department office
at 309/298-1055 and leave a message for him.  You can also reach
him at this home number of 309-836-3700.  You may also reach him
at his E-mail address:  c-helm@wiu.edu.  His World Wide Web
address is http://www.wiu.edu/users/mfcjh/wiu/home.html





Course Materials 

Textbooks

Dolbeare and Medcalf,  American Ideologies Today
Wolff,  An Introduction to Political Philosophy
Wooton ed.   Modern Political Thought:  Readings from Machiavelli to Nietzche


Course Guide
This is your Course Guide.  Following its guidelines should be
valuable to you throughout the course. For a more complete description see the syllabus.


Assignments
Exams and Papers
Exams -- All exams will be proctored following the procedures established for extension courses. I will give more details on that later. There is no fixed date for taking the exams. It is the responsibility of each student to decide when you are ready and then set it up to have the exam proctored. There is one potential problem in the combining of variable dates for exams and a Web course. Students will clearly be taking exams at different times and they will also be in contact with each other. Prior to taking the exam it is of course quite appropriate to discuss the exam amongst each other. It is not appropriate, it is dishonest, for the student who has not taken the exam to discuss its content with someone who has taken it earlier. You are each on you honor in this regard. 
Essays and Papers--There are several options in regards to the paper. If you chose to write two essays, the first essay is due in draft form by May 1st. If you choose to write a research paper you should turn in a one page proposal describing your topic by May 1st. The first draft for the research paper should be turned in by June 15th and the final draft by July 26th . If you do two essays the final draft of the first essay and the second essay should  be turned in by July 26th.  The Web site review is due prior to the end of the course which is August 1st. 

	First mid-term --- 20% 
	Second mid-term --- 20% 
	Final Exam --- 30% 
	One Research Paper or Two Essays --- 25% 
	Web Site Review -- 5% 

Exams--The exams are a combination of identification, short essays and longer essay questions. "Class participation" through email rooms, bulletin board forums, and chat rooms will be considered.
Study Guide: For the three exams   Just click the link to see the study guide.
Essays and Papers: There are two short essays (3 pages each of 750 words), or one longer research paper (6 pages or 1,500 words) required of all students. 
Web Site Review--Two pages or 500 words in which you select a Web site in the area of Modern Political Theory and write a short review of its content and merit. 
Papers --  There is one essay or research paper (6 pages or 1,500 words) required of all students on topics to be announced  
Web Site Review--Two pages or 500 words in which you select a Web site in the area of Modern Political Theory and write a short review of its content and merit (graded on a pass/fail basis).
Class participation both in class and over the Web will be considered in the final grade.



Examinations
There are three exams:

First mid-term             20% 
Second mid-term        20%
Final Exam                30% 
Two papers               30%

The exams are a combination of multiple choice, short answer and essay questions.   Class participation both in class and over the web will be considered. 


Procedures for Taking Exams
Be sure to complete all required assignments before applying for
the examination.


Schedule your examination with an appropriate proctor (see
"Supervision" section below.)  When you are ready to take the
examination, complete the Examination Request Form located in
this Course Guide and send it to the Extended Learning office.


In arranging for your exam, be sure to allow adequate time for
mail delivery of your Examination Request Form and for the exam
to arrive at the proctor's address.  Two weeks is usually
adequate.  The examination is mailed directly to the proctor; you
are responsible for paying the fee (if any) that the proctor asks
for this service.  Some instructors request that this office
obtain permission to mail examinations, and the instructor may
not grant permission until all other written materials have been
submitted and graded.  Therefore, do not mail your Examination
Request Form until two weeks before the expected examination
date.  Your instructor corrects the examination, assigns points,
and informs you of your score on each examination.


When you take your examination, be prepared to provide your
proctor with positive identification.  If your proctor does not
know you personally, you will be asked to present this
identification.


 Supervision
Students living in the Quad Cities area must take all
examinations under the supervision of personnel at the Western
Illinois University Regional Center (WIURC) or the Rock Island
Arsenal.  Call to schedule a time for the examination.  WIURC
requires 24-hour notice before scheduling an exam.


Western Illinois University Regional Center			Rock
Island Arsenal

3561 60th Street							Building 90
Room 2-26

Moline, IL  61265							Rock Island, IL 
61299-7480

309/762-9481								309/786-0288


Students living near Macomb must take all examinations in the
Extended Learning office, 401 Memorial Hall, WIU.  Call 309/298-2496 to schedule a time for the examination.


Students living in other locations should arrange for an
acceptable proctor to conduct the examination and are responsible
for fees assessed.  Acceptable proctors include the following
individuals:


	Testing center personnel at community colleges and
universities

	High school principals and counselors

	School superintendents

	Education officers of military personnel

	Education officers of correctional facilities (for
incarcerated individuals).


Indicating a proctor on your Examination Request Form who does
not meet these requirements will cause a delay in processing your
examination.  Faculty members, relatives, work supervisors, or
the immediate employer of the student may not serve as proctors. 
WIU reserves the right to reject a proposed examination proctor.


Examinations will be sent only to the proctor's institutional
address and must be proctored at the educational institution. 
Examinations will not be faxed.



Grades



Board of Governors' students should note that a grade of D or F
does not earn credit in the degreee program.




Time Limits
Students enrolled in Independent Study courses have a time period
extended beyond the academic term in which to complete all
coursework.  It is important that you understand the mechanics of
the reporting system.  At the end of the term in which you
enroll, a grade is posted on your official transcript.  If all of
the course requirements are submitted to the instructor by the
first day of finals week, a grade of A, B, C, D, or F is
recorded.  If you have not completed the course requirements, an
I (Incomplete) is recorded on your transcript.  In all cases, the
Registrar's office sends a grade report to you at the end of the
term.  To remove an I, all coursework must be submitted to the
instructor by the deadlines listed below.  When the course is
completed and  the instructor submits a Change of Grade form
(which is also signed by the department chairperson and the dean
of the college), the I is changed to a letter grade on your
official transcript.  The Registrar's office notifies you of this
change.  If coursework has not been received by the dates
specified below, however, the Registrar's office changes all
remaining Incompletes to a grade of F.  You do not receive
notification of this grade change.


 Deadline Dates
				Fall Semester		March 1

				Spring Semester		August 1

				Summer Session		December 1


If you are planning to graduate, or need your grade recorded
before the extended deadline, remember to allow adequate time for
grading of your assignments and exams.  It is also advisable to
inform your instructor if you have deadlines to meet.




Withdrawals/Tuition Credit
To receive full credit of tuition, written notice of withdrawal
must be received by the Extended Learning office no later than
six weeks after the term begins.  Students may withdraw from a
course without academic penalty upon written request during the
first ten weeks of any term provided that 50% of all course
requirements have not been completed.  An Independent Study
Course Withdrawal Form is included in this Course Guide.





Questions
If during the process of completing this course you encounter
problems or have questions, feel free to contact your instructor
or the Extended Learning office.  Write or call Extended
Learning, 401 Memorial Hall, Western Illinois University, Macomb,
IL  6l455, 309/298-2496.  Office hours are 8:00 a.m. - 4:30 p.m.,
Monday-Friday.





Questionnaire
In order to allow the Extended Learning staff to better identify
the needs and assess the problems of students enrolled in
Independent Study courses, please fill out the Questionnaire
found on the last pages of this Course Guide and return it to the
Extended Learning office when you complete the course.  If you
wish, you may submit it to your proctor at the time of your last
examination and request that it be returned with your
examination.  Your cooperation will assist the Extended Learning
staff in developing new courses and revising the ones now
offered.




Course Progress Record

You may find it helpful to use this chart to organize and record
your progress in the course.


			   Target

     Assignment #	Completion					       
Date

         Exam #	    Date	         Date Sent	      Received		Grade





























































































Course Lectures and Discussion           

Lectures from Machiavelli to the Present









[Contents]
[Index]
 [Comment]
 [Home]



 Last updated 13 January 1999

If you wish to comment: c-helm@wiu.edu 

