

Folklore and Anthropology Syllabus


 
Syllabus for Spring 1997, Folklore and Anthropology
 
(ANTH-400-001, Spring 1997) 
Meeting time:Monday and Wednesday, 5:30-7:10 pm, SA 34.



Nathan Light   (office: 530-2382, home: 539-7336)
Office Hours: Monday and Wednesday, 3:30-5:30 pm and by appointment, SA
 
12.
Web Page: 
 
http://www.utoledo.edu/~NLIGHT/mainpage.htm#folk
 E-mail me  (Please put ANTH 400
 
on the subject line.)
E-mail class discussion list: 
 
ANTH400-001@uoft02.utoledo.edu

Some web preliminaries:  What can you do with folklore and why study it?

 Teach 
 Learn to teach using Folklore in Education: The Humanities in
 
Everyday Life 
 Do fieldwork on folklore and folklife
  Check out this Australian folklife research
 
project!
  Explore the riches of the WPA
 
Life Histories Collection 
  Search for a song you can't quite
 
remember
  Browse some jumprope rhymes
 

 The Smithsonian Center for Folklife 
 National Folk Festival in Dayton,
 
Ohio, June 21-23, 1997
  A great list of
 
mythology links organized by culture area
  A smaller list of
 
folklore links 
  My very limited list of links
 
 




READINGS  (average 80-100 pages a week, much of which will be folklore
 
examples.)
 
     Course Packet on reserve in Carlson library. (PKT)
 
     Edward Bruner and Victor Turner, eds.  Anthropology of Experience.
 
(AOE)
 
     Bruce Jackson and Edward Ives, eds.  The World Observed: Reflections on the
 
Fieldwork Process. (WO)
 
     C. Kurt Dewhurst, Yvonne Lockwood, eds. Michigan Folklife Reader.
 
(MFR)



WHAT IS FOLKLORE?
 
     Folklore includes people's arts of living, their artistic ways of interacting
 
with other people and creating skillful forms in talk, work, food, play, dance,
 
song, and so on.  The study of folklore explores artistic performance within
 
its social, historical, and political contexts, and shows how shared creative
 
activity generates meaningful relationships and community ties.
 
Anthropologists usually neglect creative and artistic activity because they
 
seek the typical forms and patterns of cultural expression.  Folklorists
 
explore how individuals create their own folklore from tradition, experience,
 
and imagination, and make unique contributions to the shared culture of their
 
folk groups.

COURSE GOALS
 
     This class will connect anthropology's concern with socio-cultural order with
 
folklore's stress on the inventive and emergent aspects of individual
 
expression.  We will attain this overall goal through:
 

 exploring current debates about performance, experience, cultural politics
 
and meaning by reading and discussing recent articles by major folklorists and
 
anthropologists
 exploring the genres and contexts of folklore performances, and the methods,
 
problems and benefits of using ethnographic fieldwork to study them
 doing fieldwork projects for direct experience with ethnographic methods and
 
in-depth knowledge of folklore performers
 reading narratives about fieldwork that show it is similar to learning how
 
to participate in a folk group
 exposure to a variety of folklore both nearby and in other countries
 class discussion that explores the rich folklore in your own experience and
 
the ways you use it to create a meaningful community and identity for
 
yourself
 recognition of folklore as self-expression that is often publically devalued
 
or manipulated.  Studying folklore will help you cultivate your own
 
self-expression and appreciate it in others.

COURSE REQUIREMENTS
 
     This course depends on you to make it interesting.  I offer readings, but they
 
will only be useful if you read and respond to them.  Class discussion and
 
written responses are essential for making this a productive class for
 
everyone.  Office hours and the class e-mail listserver are important ways to
 
continue discussion: please take advantage of them.

Attendance and Discussion
 
     Attendance and participation are required.  I expect everyone to make
 
thoughtful contributions to discussion.  This is your class, and your
 
presence will only matter if you participate.  If I feel people are not
 
participating I will find other ways to include your voices and experiences,
 
such as calling on people at random and giving in- class writing assignments.

Reading Analyses and Commentaries
 
     Students will write weekly commentaries on the reading assignments and class
 
discussion (hand in a total of 5 out of the 7 assigned).  These will be an
 
opportunity to make connections between the materials we study in class and
 
your own experience and research in folklore.  These 3-6 page typed discussions
 
are due in class during the week for which the readings are assigned.
 
     Each reading analysis should try to integrate the concerns of the readings for
 
the week in terms of the authors' PURPOSE, METHODS, MATERIALS, ARGUMENTS and
 
THEORIES, and the USEFULNESS for your own interests and research or CONNECTIONS
 
to your experience.  This is not a checklist, but a guide to a thorough
 
understanding of the articles, the connections among them, and their relevance
 
to class discussion and your own experience.  For each week I also give
 
questions to guide your reading and help you recognize what you should
 
understand for commentaries and class participation.  
 
     In writing commentaries, think about the dominant issues that we consider for
 
folklore: folk genres, tradition and change, the relation of experience and
 
meaning to folklore performance, ethnic and cultural identity, the politics of
 
culture, the interaction of oral and literate expressive culture, fieldwork
 
issues, and so on.  Taking notes of examples that occur to you both in and
 
outside of class will also help you write the weekly commentaries.

 Library Research
 
     In the first three weeks of class, you should choose a folklorist who
 
interests you and research his or her work, theories and methods.  Based on
 
this, write a 5-8 page typed discussion of the folklorist's work.  I include a
 
handout describing this assignment and listing folklorists to work on.

Field Research
 
     The fieldwork project will consist of interview and observation research with
 
folklore performers.  This could be anyone with knowledge and expressive skills
 
that you want to understand.  I will give a comprehensive description of how to
 
do this assignment soon, but we will be reading about fieldwork so you should
 
be thinking about project ideas.  This will be an 8-12 page paper, with
 
additional documentation.  In-class presentation of results from your fieldwork
 
is worth up to 8 points of extra credit.

GRADING
 
     In grading written assignments I will be looking for:  1) Careful description
 
of folklore performers and their performances.  2) Good use of examples in
 
support of clear well-reasoned arguments.  3) Understanding of the issues we
 
discuss in class.  4) Avoidance of unsupported generalizations.  
 
     Papers should be written according to these guidelines:  1) You should
 
acknowledge and document your use of others' ideas whether as paraphrases or
 
exact quotes by giving citations including page numbers.  Quotation
 
marks must be used around any verbatim text.  2) Papers must be typed in 12
 
point or 10 pitch font, with one inch margins and left justification.
 
3) No plastic bindings or paper clips.  4) All final projects must be in
 
envelopes, with tapes and other documentation clearly labelled.
 
     I grade by accumulating points towards 100%.  This will be converted to a
 
letter grade on the scale: 96.7-100 = A+, 93.4-96.6 = A, 90-93.3 = A-, and so
 
on.
Attendance: if you miss more than 4 classes, I subtract 4 points for
 
each additional absence.
In-class work: 10 points (cannot be made up)
Reading analyses: 30 points (6 points each, turn in on Wednesdays, not
 
accepted late)
Library research: 20 points
Field research: 40 points, up to 5 points extra credit for in-class
 
presentation

RESPECT
 
     This class depends on our respect for one another.  This means arriving on
 
time, not getting ready to go until the class is over, and listening to each
 
other.  It means you need to speak up and respond to each other, not just to
 
me.  I try to respect people's opinions and offer facts that help you think
 
about issues.  You should all do the same.
 
     Above all, respect means that you are fully here and alert and participate
 
thoughtfully so that everyone can gain from this class.  It means that everyone
 
take responsibility for making this a class that contributes to their own lives
 
and those of others.
 
     Respect your consultants in fieldwork: do not betray their trust.  Respect
 
other users of the library: do not damage or highlight library materials when
 
doing research.

Special needs and abilities are respected
 
     Students with disabilities and those for whom course requirements pose
 
difficulties should discuss their situation with me as soon as possible.
 
Anyone who needs additional help with any requirements in this course should
 
take advantage of the resources available from the Office of Accessibility,
 
530-4981, the Reading Center, 530-3105, the Study Skills Center, 530-2426, or
 
the Writing Center, 530-4939.

Plagiarism and cheating are failures to respect yourself and others
 
     Plagiarism is the use of another person's work without stating the source.
 
Cheating is the use of unauthorized materials or copying another's work during
 
a quiz, test or other assignment.  I will give an F for the course to any
 
student who participates in cheating or plagiarism.  If you have to copy
 
someone's words or ideas give a proper citation with page numbers and quotation
 
marks and you won't flunk.



INTRODUCTION TO SOME BASIC CONCEPTS FOR THE STUDY OF
 
FOLKLORE
 
     There are many approaches to the study of folklore.  Many scholars have
 
studied the changes that occur when jokes, songs, dances, stories, or proverbs
 
are performed in different cultures and historical contexts.  Others study the
 
ways people use riddles, legends, or games to entertain, teach or persuade
 
others in the many folk groups they join.  The study of folklife
 
includes crafts, foodways, farming, fishing, hunting, economic and social
 
exchange, holidays, clothing, building designs and construction methods, and so
 
on.  Medical beliefs, home remedies, and healing practices are studied to
 
understand community and family ideas about medicine and the body.
 
     Folklorists stress the importance of understanding the local and particular,
 
rather than generalizing about cultural practices.  In recent decades folklore
 
study has paid more attention to the place of folklore in the lives of the
 
people who perform it, and the place of their performances within their folk
 
groups.  In this kind of study, folklorists agree that to understand folklore
 
one must understand the people who perform it and the social and cultural
 
contexts in which they perform it.
 
     Folklore items that are collected and published without information about how
 
and when it is used, and by whom, may be interesting but they are devoid of
 
life.  Folklore should be understood as people create it in their lives, and
 
change it for new purposes and to fit new situations.  The transmission
 
of folklore is an active process, in which both performer and audience
 
participate.  Tradition is not fixed, but actively made, creating
 
endless possibilities.  All people live within traditions, and all people use
 
and recreate them in their own daily activities, especially for audiences who
 
appreciate their skills.  Folklore consists of both these artistic skills and
 
the forms that are created.
 
     Folklore performance and folklife practices are closely tied to social
 
identities: people constantly define themselves in terms of their skills,
 
beliefs, language, dress, food, and amusements.  These are important ways that
 
they create shared understandings.  People do not simply find others who are
 
like them: they make a community in which they share ideas and culture and
 
expectations through shared experience.  One must spend time together to form
 
close friendships and family ties, and folklore includes many of the ways
 
people make this time rewarding and memorable.
 
     The social identities created by participating in cultural communities shape
 
how people relate to the larger society.  Culture becomes a social and
 
political issue in many public contexts.  Many folklorists (including myself)
 
concentrate on how folklore performances are used as signs of the past, and as
 
practices that create or resist dominant culture of a nation.  Germany,
 
Finland, Greece, Turkey and many other nation-states have organized
 
their national cultures around certain ideas about pure and original folk
 
culture, and reject much cultural variation as contamination.  On the other
 
hand, in consciously multi-ethnic societies such as the United States,
 
India or Yugoslavia, ethnic cultures become the focus of political contests
 
over what should be the dominant culture, and what are the cultural rights of
 
minority groups.  The problems of defining political autonomy in
 
federations--called "state's rights" in the U.S.--also arise around questions
 
of cultural autonomy and rights, but are more complex because even the
 
meaning of "culture" is often contested.
 
     In the larger society, the folklore forms that are part of a community's
 
shared life and culture can take on new meaning as political markers of
 
socially defined identities such as race, ethnicity, class, gender, age,
 
profession, sexual identity and so on.  The expressive culture or folklore
 
learned in community experience takes on ideological meanings in contests in
 
the larger society, and can be a way to display connections to those
 
communities, as well as to histories, beliefs, practices and so on.  A person's
 
culture is how she makes himself comfortable in the communities where she
 
spends time.  But when there are economic and political pressures to change a
 
community's culture, people tend to protect it from this outside invasion.
 
     Political scientists, sociologists and anthropologists tend to study
 
generalized cultural structures and institutional control over economic and
 
political resources, and how these patterns are learned and resisted,
 
perpetuated and changed, in short, how society is organized and how social
 
order is imposed on individuals.  In contrast, folklorists pay more attention
 
to creative individuals and communicative processes.  People are not assumed to
 
share a culture or identity from birth: they share in making the cultures of
 
their folk groups.  Unlike schools, people learn folklore in participation and
 
creating their own.  Each participant in a folk group brings and explores their
 
own creative resources.  Each member of a folk group is different, but actively
 
participates in creating a shared social order.  
 
     Folklore shapes social order because it appeals to people, draws them into
 
participation and belief, and can be a persuasive argument to change.  Art is
 
more powerful than rules.  Creative expression in artistic forms invents or
 
recreates order, and often displaces rules about order.  By being vital in the
 
communities where people live, where they spend the most time together and form
 
the closest bonds, folklore subverts institutional structures and challenges
 
the top-down cultural hierarchy of schooling and mass media by validating
 
personal experience and creative skills.
 
     Jokes, songs and urban legends criticize the flawed political, social and
 
technological world we live in.  Family and community life gives us a center of
 
personal strength away from anonymous political and economic forces.  Folklore
 
creates powerful ties that do not depend on hierarchical structures.  The
 
institutional power of the laws, media and schools is often directed at
 
modifying and suppressing folklore to gain ideological, social and political
 
power and to undermine community identities that can resist centralized
 
political, cultural and social control.  Much public and political discourse
 
describes folk groups (usually people without political and economic power) and
 
their folk culture as pure but simple, backwards, uneducated, vulgar (literally
 
"common"), marginal, irrational and dependent on tradition for guidance, and so
 
on.  The study of folklore works against these dominant ideas about folk groups
 
by revealing the intellect and skill of folk performers.


FOLKLORE AND ANTHROPOLOGY, SPRING 1997.  
COURSE CALENDAR  (readings to be done for the day assigned. HAF
 
=Handbook of American Folklore.)  (opt. = optional)

Mar. 31-Apr. 2.  Folklore forms and performances.
Mon.:  Items, genres, events, contexts, and meanings.  How to describe
 
folklore.
Wed.:  Group work on versions of ballads and Native American trickster
 
myths.  Read:
 
Toelken. "From Entertainment to Realization in Navajo Fieldwork" WO, pp.
 
1-17
 
Ives. "Oral and Written Tradition..." WO, pp. 159-170 
 
Singer. "Paul Bunyan and Hiawatha" MFR, pp. 3-5, 121-148 
 
Dorson. "Paul Bunyan in the News." Folklore and Fakelore. 291-295,
 
309-317, 334-36 (PKT, opt.)

Apr. 7-9.  Folklore genres and social activity.  READING QUESTIONS FOR
 
APRIL 2-9:
 

 Discuss the ways that written forms influence oral folklore.
 
 How do performer's ideas relate to folklore genres and performance
 
contexts?
 
 What are folklore genres and how should they be studied?
 
 How do oral genres become part of social activities?
 
 Discuss some of the reasons that folklore changes from performance to
 
performance.
 
 How do folklore and relationships become linked in both families and
 
fieldwork? 
Mon.: Read: 
 
Ben-Amos. "Introduction" Folklore Genres. pp. x-xvii, xxxvi-xxxix.
 
(PKT)
 
Dundes.  "Texture, Text, and Context." pp. 20-23, 30-32. (PKT) 
 
Bauman. "The Field Study of Folklore in Context." HAF 362-367. (PKT) 
 
McDowell.  "A symposium on locomotion" Children's Riddling. 136-139.
 
(PKT)
 
Dolby-Stahl. "Personal Experience Stories." HAF, 268-276. (PKT)

Wed.: Family, community, self.  Read: 
 
Kotkin and Zeitlin. "In the Family Tradition." HAF, 90-99. (PKT)
 
Reynolds. "Crossing and recrossing the line..." WO, 100-117. 
 
Montell. "Absorbed in Gospel Music" WO, 118-127. 
 
Stekert. "On Time, Truth, and Epiphanies." WO, pp. 128-43. 

Apr. 14-16.  Legends, Beliefs, and Identities.  Library research
 
paper due by Friday.
Mon.: Read: 
 
Dégh. "The Legend Teller" Narratives in Society, 79-89 (PKT)
 
Jackson. "The Perfect Informant" WO, 206-226
 
Dorson. "Black Legends of Calvin" MFR, 149-167

Wed.: Ethnicity and Identity in Detroit.  Film: Tales from Arab
 
Detroit.
 
Dégh. "Satanic Child Abuse in a Blue House" Narratives in
 
Society, 358-368 (PKT)
 
Reuss. "Suburban Folklore." HAF, 172-177 (PKT)
 
Langlois. "Urban Legends and the Faces of Detroit" MFR, 107-119 

Apr. 21-23.  Communities, identities, folk culture and history.  
 
READING QUESTIONS FOR APRIL 14-23:

 What are legends, who tells them, and why?  How do they relate to
 
identity?
 
 Discuss how legends reflect and shape cultural and social history.
 
 How does folklore relate to social power and the difference between public
 
and private behavior?
 
 What does oral history discover that is missed when studying of written
 
documents?
 
 What effect does immigration have on people's folklore?
 
 Discuss how the different historical and geographic routes of immigration
 
and social situations immigrants end up in affect their folklore.
 
 Discuss the ways that folklore is used to comment on, reinforce, or bridge
 
social boundaries.
 

Mon.: Identity, social status, history and performance.  Read: 
 
Limón. "Folklore, Social Conflict and the U.S.-Mexico Border"
 
HAF, 216-223 (PKT)
 
Levine. "How to Interpret American Folklore Historically" HAF, 338-343
 
(PKT)
 
Green. "Magnolias Grow in Dirt" 29-33 (PKT)
 
Portelli. "I'm Going to Say it Now: Interviewing the Movement" WO,
 
44-59
 
Rosenberg. "Strategy and Tactics in Fieldwork: The Whole Don Messer Show"
 
WO, 144-158

Wed.: History, ethnic identity, immigration, and cultural boundaries.
 
Film: J'ai été au bal. Read:
Kirshenblatt-
 
Gimblett. "Studying Immigrant and Ethnic Folklore" HAF,
 
39-47 (PKT)
 
Barrand. "Stumbling Upon Lancashire Mill Culture in New England" WO,
 
171-184 (skim)
 
Dewhurst, et al.  "Michigan Hmong Textiles"
 
 MFR, 57-70 
 
Cochrane. "Commercial Fishermen and Isle Royale" MFR, 89-91, 98-104
 
Au and Brode. "The Lingering Shadow of New France" MFR, 321-345 

Apr. 28-30.  The politics of ethnic, minority and folk cultures.
 
Stereotypes, typifications, generalization, purity, and allochrony.
 
Fieldwork project plans due this week.
 
READING QUESTIONS FOR THIS WEEK:

 Discuss the ways people claim and keep possession of customs and
 
traditions.
 
 Can you think of examples of debates over origins from your own experience?
 
What is at stake in such debates?
 
 Why are origins so important to people, and how do people work to preserve
 
original culture?
 
 Do we owe a debt when we borrow cultural forms?
 
 How do folklore forms change as they are transmitted from one society to
 
another? 
Mon.:  Origins, authority, authenticity and performance.  Read:  
 
Leary. "Reading 'The Newspaper Dress'..." MFR, 205-223
 
Lockwood. "The Sauna..." MFR, 307-320
 
Lockwood and Lockwood. "The Cornish Pasty..." MFR, 359-374
 
Dewhurst and MacDowell. "A Fantastic Tradition..." MFR, 47-56 (opt)

Wed.:  Secular and sacred mythology. Diffusion. Film: Tigertown
 
(sport as ideology)
 
Light. "Pizza in Thirty Minutes" (PKT)
 
Slater. "Four Moments" WO, pp. 18-31
 
Jarring. "Muslim Tales of Noah's Ark" Literary Texts From Kashghar. pp.
 
30-34. (PKT)
 
Rabghuzi. "On the Birth of the Prophet Jesus" The Stories of the
 
Prophets. pp. 484-495. (PKT)
 
Hollis. The Ancient Egyptian "Tale of Two Brothers".  pp. 5-15 and 182.
 
(PKT)
 
Ranelagh. "Joseph and Potiphar's Wife" The Past We Share pp. 2-3, 9-16.
 
(PKT)

May 5-7.  Ideology and the construction of national origins and dominant
 
culture. Finding folk roots and controlling multi-culturalism. Time's pyramid.
 
READING QUESTIONS FOR THIS WEEK:

 Why is shared national culture and language important to people, and how do
 
they create them?
 
 What methods and arguments are used to create good and pure folk
 
traditions?
 
 How have Native Americans become part of American mythology?
 
 Discuss the ways that ideas about time are central to the concept of culture
 
and social order.
 
 How does narrative shape time and contribute to ideas about culture and
 
social order?
 

Mon. and Wed.:  Read:
 
Wilson. "The Kalevala and Finnish Politics." Folklore, Nationalism
 
and Politics pp. 51-72 (PKT)
 
Whisnant.  All that is Native and Fine.  pp. 44-57, 218-223, 237-247.
 
(PKT)
 
Schwartz. "Henry Ford's Melting Pot." Ethnic Groups in the City.  pp.
 
191-198 (PKT)
 
Washburn. "The Noble and Ignoble Savage." HAF, 60-65 (PKT)
Bruner.
 
"Ethnography as Narrative" AOE, 139-155
 
F. Turner. "Reflexivity as Evolution in Thoreau's Walden" AOE,
 
pp. 73-93

May 12-14: Material culture, migration and diffusion. National culture
 
and local expression (popular and folk traditions). Cultural geography. Folk
 
architecture, the Greek Revival, and classicism.
 Examples of vernacular architecture 
 
and some  less vernacular  and a discussion of  studying vernacular architecture.
 

 
READING QUESTIONS FOR THIS WEEK:
 What can artifacts and names reveal that other historical sources cannot?
 What was the  Greek Revival , and why did people
 
participate in it? 
 Another Greek Revival example and
 
 another  and  a discussion of Greek Revival in New England
 
 
 Discuss the relationship of personal expression and national culture, or
 
folk and popular culture.  How do they influence each other?
 How do crafts, symbolic forms and verbal lore connect in folk life?
Mon. and Wed.: Film: Around Round Barns.  Read: 
 
McLennan.  "Vernacular Architecture..." MFR, pp. 15-42
 
Glassie. Pattern in the Material Folk Culture of the Eastern United
 
States. 124-133, 184-220 (PKT)
 
Glassie "Folkloristic Study of the American Artifact: Objects and Objectives."
 
HAF, 376-383 (PKT)
 
Toelken. "Aesthetics and Repertoire." The Dynamics of Folklore.  183-209
 
(PKT)
 
Zelinsky. "Names and National Heroes" Nation into State. 32-37, 126-131,
 
136-139 (PKT)
 
Zelinsky.  "Flag and Eagle" and "The Buildings Speak" Nation into State.
 
196-213. (PKT, opt)

May 19-21.  Public Displays, Celebrations, Festivals and the Politics of
 
Identity.  
 
READING QUESTIONS FOR THIS WEEK:

 How and why do public performances become political events?
 
 How do political and historical changes affect festivals?
 
 How do social tensions and frustrations find release in public festivals?
 
 Discuss the ways people represent themselves through objects and
 
performances, and the changes in meaning and audience that take place for
 
political, historical and economic reasons.
 

Mon.:  Events and the question of collective action, descriptions of the
 
whole.  Film: Carnival del Pueblo.
 
Myerhoff. "Life Not Death in Venice..." AOE, 261-286
 
Stewart. "Patronage and Control in the Trinidad Carnival" AOE, 289-314
 

 
Moe. "Meaning in Community Events." MFR, 347-357

Wed.:  Modes of self-representation. 
 
Babcock. "Modeled Selves..." AOE, 316-343
 
Dewhurst. "Museums for the People..." MFR, 71-83

May 28 (no class Monday).  Stories and the discovery of meaning.
 
Representing events, performances, meaning and identity.  Skills for analyzing
 
and presenting fieldwork.  
Wed.:  Documenting and retelling stories and events. Developing cultural
 
understanding and social rapport.  Read: 
 
E. Fine.  The Folklore Text pp. 182-195 (PKT) 
 
Becker. "How I Learned What a Crock Was" WO, 185-191
 
Silverman. "Who's Gypsy Here?..." WO, 193-201
 
Rosaldo. "Ilongot Hunting as Story and Experience" AOE, 97-121 and
 
133-134

June 2-4.  Occupational lore and project presentations.
 
READING QUESTIONS FOR MAY 28-JUNE 2 (DUE JUNE 2):

 Discuss the possibilities and problems involved in making written
 
representation of oral performance.
 
 How do stories differ from other ways of describing social processes and
 
activities?
 
 Discuss how we learn from stories, and how this differs from learning from
 
other representations.
 
 Why is it important to study the folklore of people at work?
 
 Discuss the ways folklore is part of contests over power in the workplace. 
Mon.: Occupational Life and Lore. Film: Miles of Smiles, Years of
 
Struggle. Read: 
 
Dewhurst and MacDowell.  "The Pottery and the People..." MFR, 245-261.
 
Lockwood. "The Joy of Labor" MFR, 263-273.
 
Workman. "A Bean on the Table..." MFR, 275-288.

Wed.: Project presentations. 

Exam week.
 
June 9.  Fieldwork projects due.  Additional presentations if there are still
 
people who want to do them.


 
.
