

Syllabus for MUSE 450/550 Stone Tool Analysis


Instructor: Lohse Classroom: Muse 204-A
Office Hours: F, 1-3PM Time: tba 
Muse 450/550
Stone Tool Analysis
Syllabus
This class is a detailed introduction to the method and practice of analysis 
  of archaeological stone tool technology. Students will be taught the rudiments 
  of flintknapping, principles of scientific methodology including how to set 
  up computer-driven analytical frameworks, and required to perform basic technological 
  and functional analysis of stone tools. 
An innovative aspect of the course is liberal use of the Internet for transmission 
  of resource materials, information, and completion of assigned exercises, quizzes 
  and examinations. We will have required chatrooms once a week, often with guest 
  experts. Use of online resources combined with hands-on practicums greatly accelerates 
  student introductions to the subject of stone tool technology.
Please remember that this course has a strong Internet component. Students, 
  instructors, guest experts and resource people will be transmitting conversations, 
  written materials, and images online. Student exercises, quizzes and examinations, 
  and performance evaluations will be accessible by the instructor and the graduate 
  assistant. Your conversations will be accessible online as a permanent record. 
  Your submitted assignments will be kept for a period extending two weeks beyond 
  the end of the course as a secure digital archive. These materials will be expunged 
  on a regular basis unless formal permission is sought from you for long term 
  archiving. Students should keep copy files of all transmitted materials to ensure 
  against errors in transmission or record keeping. 
Skip Lohse
lohserne@isu.edu
208-282-5189
Robert Schlader, graduate assistant
schlrobe@isu.edu
Course Objective:
At the completion of this course, students will have a good basic knowledge 
  of archaeological analyses of stone tool production and use. Past students have 
  been able to join archaeological field and lab projects as lithic analysts, 
  responsible for basic design of lithic research and lab and analysis protocols. 
  Students are encouraged to pursue avenues of research highlighted in this course, 
  and to continue correspondence with researchers introduced in our reading and 
  in chatrooms.
Schedule:
We will decide on a schedule that is convenient for all students, which 
  requires attendance at one two-hour in-person meeting per week. There will also 
  be scheduled required online two-hour chatrooms every week. Selected class resources 
  will be available for purchase and online.
Grading:
Students will be graded based on: participation and attendance including 
  online chatrooms and information sharing (15%); completion of assigned practical 
  exercises (45%); completion of eight quizzes (15%) and two midterm examinations 
  (25%). 
Required Texts:
Crabtree, Don E.
 1972 An introduction to the technology of stone tools. Occasional Paper 
  No.28, Idaho Museum of Natural History, Pocatello. 
Crabtree, Don E.
 Crabtree Video Series. Idaho Museum of Natural History, Pocatello.
Lohse, E.S. and D. Sammons
 2001 DIGITAL Stones. Interactive CD-ROM. 
  Special Publication of the Idaho Museum of Natural History, Pocatello. 
Schedule
Week 1 
  Organize schedules and pick agreed upon times for class meetings and chatrooms. 
  
  Schedule hours for use of lab space and equipment. 
Week 2 
  Read: Digital Stones: Technological Analysis
Film: View Shadow of Man
Week 3 
  Read: Digital Stones: Technological Analysis continued
Film: View The Flintworker
Chatroom 1: Introduction
Quiz 1
Week 4 
  Read: Digital Stones: Functional Analysis
  Film: View Ancient Projectile Points
Chatroom 2: Technologies of production
Project due: Generalized 
  core production
Quiz 2
Week 5 
  Read: Digital Stones: Functional Analysis continued
Film: View The Hunter's Edge
Chatroom 3: Studies of function
Quiz 3
Week 6 
  Read: Digital Stones: Image Processing and Analysis
Film: View The Alchemy of Time
Chatroom 4
Quiz 4
Week 7 
  Read: Digital Stones: Models and Lithic Analysis
Chatroom 5
Quiz 5

Week 8 
Project due: Prepared 
  core reduction
Chatroom 6: Guest Expert
Midterm Examination 1
Week 9 
  Chatroom 7: Guest Expert
Quiz 6
Week 10 
Project due: Scrapers
Chatroom 8: Guest Expert
Quiz 7
Week 11 
  Chatroom 9: Guest Expert
Quiz 8
Week 12 
Project due: Prismatic 
  Blade Reduction or Microblade 
  Reduction
Chatroom 10
 Quiz 9
Week 13 
  Field Trip
Quiz 10
Week 14 
Project due: Knives, Points 
  or Composite Blade 
  Tools

Week 15 
  Midterm Examination 2

Week 16 
  Final Examination


