






Master of Arts in Humanities
Penn State Harrisburg






Nature
        of the Program
Admission
        to the Program
Advising
Other
        Resources



The Students and their Careers
Financial Aid
Troubleshooting
The
        Master's Production



The Faculty
Program
        Requirements
Library
        Resources
Answering Questions/
Solving Problems







NATURE OF THE
PROGRAM:

The Humanities Graduate Program is
  interdisciplinary. It emphasizes critical theories and interpretive approaches that
  transcend disciplinary boundaries, as well as providing advanced study within various
  humanities disciplines. The Program offers graduate-level study in the fields of art
  history, communications, history, literature, music history, philosophy, and writing,
  along with interdisciplinary topics. Drawing on the perspectives of the various arts and
  disciplines and on a variety of theoretical approaches, the Program's faculty assist
  students in developing important analytical, synthetic, and interpretive skills.
Graduate students in this Program acquire an
  ability to interpret several kinds of "texts" (both literary and non-literary
  works); investigate them using standard reference tools; situate them aesthetically,
  critically, and socially; and write about them in scholarly and sophisticated ways. They
  learn to relate works from different genres to one another, to a pertinent critical or
  theoretical perspective, or to a significant issue.

<TOP OF PAGE>

THE
STUDENTS AND THEIR CAREERS:

Graduate study in the humanities can prepare
  students for careers in teaching, communications, business, government, and the arts, as
  well as for further study in the liberal arts. The intellectual content and expressive
  skills it cultivates are advantageous in many professions. 
Students come to the Program from many
  backgrounds and for a range of purposes. Most are returning after spending some time in
  other pursuits since college; most attend part-time. Others arrive directly from
  undergraduate work. Many are teachers, seeking permanent certification through an
  interdisciplinary degree that expands their pedagogical and personal repertoire. Some
  intend to begin or change careers; others wish to develop further expertise, prepare for
  doctoral study, or satisfy strong personal interests. Many Program alumnae/i have returned
  to their schools prepared to teach a wider range of courses and subjects; others have gone
  on to doctoral or professional programs; become faculty at universities and community
  colleges; worked as journalists, public relations specialists, and corporate art
  directors; practiced various fine and performing arts; become directors of colleges'
  cultural programming; and followed still other pursuits.

<TOP OF PAGE>

THE FACULTY

The Program's disciplinary and interdisciplinary
  breadth is evident in the activities of its faculty. Their varied yet overlapping
  interests, both creative and academic, support interdisciplinary teaching and research and
  a wide range of student projects. The faculty's specialties focus mainly on the modern era
  and Western civilization, but encompass some earlier periods and other cultures as well.
  The School's American Studies faculty provides additional expertise on U.S. history, art
  and architecture, literature, music, folklore, and anthropology; see the separate American
  Studies Graduate Program publications for details.
In the following list of faculty and their
  specialties, an asterisk (*)
  indicates a member of the Graduate Faculty, eligible to chair a master's production
  supervisory committee. 

* Charles Cantalupo
    (Ph.D., Rutgers), Professor of English, is a scholar, poet, and playwright. His books
    include Ngugi wa Thiong'o: Texts and Contexts and The World of Ngugi wa Thiong'o
    (Africa World Press), A Literary Leviathan: Thomas Hobbes's Masterpiece of Language
    (Bucknell University Press), Poetry, Mysticism, and Feminism: from th' nave to the
    chops (Spectacular Diseases), and Anima/l Wo/man and Other Spirits (Spectacular
    Diseases). He is a translater of contemporary Russian, Gikuyu and Tigrinya poetry,
    including a book of translations of the Eritrean poet, Reesom Haile, forthcoming for The
    Red Sea Press. In 1994, he directed Ngugi wa Thiong'o: Texts and Contexts, the largest
    conference ever held on an African writer. He is co-chair of "Against All Odds:
    African Languages and Literatures into the 21st Century" conference to be held in
    Asmara, Eritrea, January 11-17, 2000.
* Eton F. Churchill
    (M.F.A., Tulane), Assistant Professor of Humanities and Communications, has written,
    produced and directed dramatic and documentary television productions, independent films,
    training scripts, and original screenplays. He is the author of two books, several
    articles and plays, and has been a jury member for the American Film Festival. He teaches
    courses in scriptwriting, film, and dramatic form.


* Theodora Rapp
    Graham (Ph.D., Pennsylvania), Associate Professor of Humanities and English, was
    founding editor of the international William Carlos Williams Review. Her research
    in modern poetry, twentieth century American literature, and contemporary fiction has
    yielded essays published in a number of journals and books. She teaches graduate courses
    in poetry, fiction, and drama. 


* Hartmut Heep
    (Ph.D., Illinois), Associate Professor of Humanities, German, and Comparative Literature,
    specializes in poetry, and Gender Studies. He has published two books on German and
    American poetries, and numerous articles on Apollinaire, Flaubert, Schiller, Bertholt
    Brecht, Rainer Maria Rilke, and Men's Studies. While being an expert in twentieth century
    American, German, and French literatures, particularly poetry, he is also working in the
    fields of Multiculturalism, and Holocaust Studies. As an international scholar he has
    shared his work most recently at conferences in Israel and Spain. Dr. Heep teaches a large
    variety of graduate and undergraduate courses in four departments and in three languages.
    He is currently directing a dissertation on twentieth century German literature.


* Louise E. Hoffman
    (Ph.D., Bryn Mawr), Associate Professor of Humanities and History, studies the history of
    psychoanalysis and psychological interpretations of history and biography. Her current
    research is on government-sponsored studies of Germany during the Second World War. She
    teaches graduate courses on cultural and intellectual history and historical
    interpretation and writing.


* Margaret Rose
    Jaster (Ph.D., Maryland), Assistant Professor of Humanities and Literature, utilizes
    Cultural Studies and feminist theory to examine early British culture. She explores both
    the role of clothing in Shakespeare's time, and the role of Shakespeare in our own. Her
    courses include studies of British and Irish history and literature.
* Patricia E.
    Johnson (Ph.D., Minnesota), Associate Professor of Humanities and Literature, is a
    scholar of British literature who investigates Victorian culture and novels and the works
    of nineteenth and twentieth century women writers. She has published articles on Charlotte
    Bronte, Charles Dickens, George Eliot, Elizabeth Gaskell and Henry James and has completed
    a book about the representation of working-class women in the mid-Victorian industrial
    novel. She is particularly interested in feminist criticism of narrative forms and the
    relationships between literature and history. 


* Donald Lindenmuth
    (Ph.D., New School), Assistant Professor of Philosophy and Humanities, studies the
    interrelationship between the history of philosophy and literature and the interaction
    between twentieth century postmodern philosophical approaches and the philosophies of the
    past, especially Plato, Descartes and Nietzsche. He has offered a graduate course on
    Shakespeare's Political Philosophy.
* William J. Mahar
    (Ph.D., Syracuse), Professor of Humanities and Music, is Director of the School of
    Humanities. His areas of expertise include European and American music, music by women
    composers, Civil War songs, and nineteenth century musical theater, topics on which he has
    published a number of articles. He has a book forthcoming on Blackface minstrelsy. He has
    taught courses in music history, music theory, and major musical genres and forms as well
    as interdisciplinary humanities.


* Glen Mazis
    (Ph.D., Yale), Associate Professor of Humanities and Philosophy, studies existentialism
    and phenomenology; modern Continental philosophy; philosophy of art; and Eastern and
    feminist philosophy. He has published examinations of Merleau-Ponty, Sartre, and
    philosophical issues in works of literature and in health care. His graduate course topics
    include aesthetics and feminist philosophy. 


* Cheri Louise Ross
    (Ph.D., Purdue), Assistant Professor of Humanities and English Education, has taught
    American literature, women's literature, Asian American, African American, Native
    American, and Chicana literature, as well as linguistics, composition theory, and methods
    of teaching secondary English. She has published numerous articles, including studies of
    Anna Katharine Green, Emma Lazarus, Flannery O'Connor, Catharine Maria Sedgwick, and
    Marietta Holley. Her essays on the pedagogy of writing have appeared in College
    Teaching, The National Writing Project Voice, and The Clearinghouse.
    Her research continues to focus on American women writers.


* Linda Mylin
    Ross (M.F.A., Maryland Institute College of Art), Assistant Professor of Education and
    Humanities, is an artist with an extensive exhibit record and an expert on Discipline
    Based art education. Much of her current art work expresses concern with feminist and
    environmental issues. Her many art courses include traditional studio offerings and
    interdisciplinary courses in criticism and art history.


* Crispin Sartwell
    (Ph.D., Virginia) Associate Professor of Humanities and Communication, has taught and
    written on aesthetics, African-American autobiography, eastern philosophy, and other
    topics in the humanities. He is the author of The Art of Living: Aesthetics of the
    Ordinary in World Spiritual Traditions (SUNY 1995); Obscenity, Anarchy, Reality
    (SUNY 1996); and Act Like You Know: African-American Autobiography and White Identity
    (University of Chicago 1998). He writes for the opinion pages of The Philadelphia
    Inquirer and other papers.


* Judith Stephens
    (Ph.D., Kent State), Associate Professor of Speech Communication, is a scholar of American
    Theatre with areas of expertise in feminist theatre and African-American drama. Her
    publications focus on issues of race, class, and gender in American theatre and, most
    recently, she has coedited Strange Fruit: Plays on Lynching by American Women
    (Indiana University Press, 1998), a pioneering anthology that investigates the
    representation of racial violence in plays by black and white women. Dr. Stephens teaches
    courses in theatre and women's studies.


* Troy Thomas
    (M.F.A., Colorado; Ph.D., California at Berkeley), Associate Professor of Humanities and
    Art, has published works on Renaissance and Baroque art and on methods of
    interdisciplinary humanities scholarship. He is writing a book on Caravaggio and late
    Renaissance natural philosophy. He has experience as a professional photographer and
    painter. He teaches graduate courses in art history. 


* Anita M. Vickers
    (Ph.D., Purdue), Assistant Professor of Humanities and English, specializes in eighteenth
    and nineteenth century American gothic fiction. She has published articles that examined
    the gothic novels of Charles Brockden Brown from a neo-historicist perspective, a
    perspective which specifically questions assumptions of power and culture. She has also
    published studies on works by women writers. She is currently working on a book-length
    study of the pseudonymous gothic thrillers of Louisa May Alcott. This study investigates
    how the literary double-life of an author renowned for her moralistic children's novels
    redresses cultural and gender expectations in nineteenth-century America. She teaches
    courses in the gothic novel, women writers, the literature of fantasy, and American
    literature. 


* Victor J. Viser
    (Ph.D., Temple), Assistant Professor of Humanities and Communication Studies, is a scholar
    working in the areas of communication theory and history. His areas of expertise and
    approach in the discipline include communication aesthetics, communication philosophy, and
    neurophysiological affectations in media reception. He has published works about
    advertising history, communication research methodology, and mental imagery formation. In
    addition, he is a writer and director of commercial media and exhibits his fine art
    photography in several galleries. He is currently writing a qualitative examination of
    American advertising imagery in World War II. His general course offerings include topics
    in advertising, public relations, and the mass media.


* Matthew Wilson
    (Ph.D., Rutgers), Associate Professor of Humanities and Writing, has published on a range
    of contemporary American novelists--the African-American writers, John Edgar Wideman and
    David Bradley, two essays on Philip Roth, and an essay on John Updike, which has been
    republished in Rabbit Tales: Poetry and Politics in Updike's Rabbit Novels
    (1998). His edition of Charles W. Chesnutt's manuscript novel, Paul Marchand, F.M.C.
    (1998) has been published by the University Press of Mississippi and was favorably
    reviewed in the Sunday New York Times Book Review. An essay on Chesnutt is
    forthcoming in College Literature as is his first poem accepted for publication in
    fourteen years. His current teaching interests are broadly in American fiction, with a
    special interest in African-American fiction. In addition, he has become passionately
    interested in ancient Greece, particularly in constructions of gender. 

Humanities students may also take courses in the American Studies
  Program. American Studies faculty include:

Michael Barton (Ph.D., Pennsylvania),
    Associate Professor of Social Science and American Studies, works in ethnographic studies,
    intellectual history, national character studies, and cross-cultural studies. He has
    written two books, Goodmen: The Character of Civil War Soldiers,
    and Life by the Moving Road: An Illustrated History of Greater Harrisburg and is
    currently co-editor of a series of sourcebooks in American Studies for Scholarly
    Resources.


Simon J. Bronner (Ph.D., Indiana), Coordinator
    of the American Studies Program and Distinguished Professor of Folklore and American
    Studies, has published many books including Following Tradition:
    Folklore in the Discourse of American Culture, Grasping Things: Folk Material
    Culture and Mass Society, American Folklore Studies: An Intellectual History,
    and Old-Time Music Makers of New York State. 


Alison Hirsch (Ph.D., Columbia),
    Assistant Professor of American Studies and History, teaches American history, American
    Indian studies, and women's studies. She has worked on the publication of the William Penn
    papers and contributed articles to Women and History and Pennsylvania
    History. 


Irwin Richman (Ph.D., Pennsylvania),
    Professor of History and American Studies, is an authority on Pennsylvania artists,
    architecture, and decorative arts; his three books on the topics are required reading in
    the field. He also leads summer-tour courses on Pennsylvania German culture and decorative
    arts, historic gardens, artists of the Hudson Valley, and colonial capitals, to name a
    few. He has a book on the bungalow colonies of the Catskills entitled Borscht Belt Bungalows (Temple University Press), and lectures
    widely on the Catskills in American culture.


<TOP OF PAGE>

ADMISSION
TO THE PROGRAM:

Applicants must hold a baccalaureate degree from
  an accredited college or university before entering the Program; they should have earned a
  grade-point average of 2.5 or better in their junior and senior years. Applicants should
  submit the following:





a Graduate School application form and fee;

two copies of official transcripts from all
        colleges or universities attended;

a letter explaining their reasons for interest
        in the Program;

two letters (preferably from undergraduate
        professors or 
        others familiar with the applicant's academic work or intellectual interests); and
           

a writing sample (term paper, or other work;
        see below).







Writing samples are used to assess applicants' ability to meet the faculty's
  expectations for graduate-level writing. They should be recent; examples of previous
  academic work (critical essays or research papers) are best. Candidates may write a brief
  essay (two to three pages) specifically for this purpose: a critical review of some
  humanities work--book, film, art exhibit, musical performance--in their recent experience.
  Samples of creative writing and/or a portfolio of art works can be submitted as a
  supplement to the writing sample.
Obtain information and application forms from and mail all
  materials to:




Enrollment Services
    Penn State Harrisburg
    777 W. Harrisburg Pike
    Middletown, PA 17057-4898
    (717) 948-6250




Application deadlines are April 1 for admission for the following fall
  semester and September 1 and November 1 for admission for the following spring semester.
  Members of the Program's Admissions Committee occasionally request an interview and/or
  additional supporting materials when considering applications. It usually takes the
  committee between two weeks to a month to make decisions, and, at that point, the Program
  Coordinator promptly informs applicants of the Committee's decisions. An applicant
  admitted to the Program is also assigned an adviser based on his/her areas of interest.
Provisional admission is occasionally granted to applicants who meet most
  standards but whose preparation is lacking in some respect. Provisional students who
  demonstrate satisfactory completion of requirements stated in their original letter of
  admission (e.g., additional course work, or successful completion of one or more graduate
  courses) are admitted to the degree program without further application.
Non-degree status: Those whose applications are pending, or who wish to
  sample the Program before applying, may enrol for courses as special non-degree graduate
  students, after first completing a one-page form available from the Enrollment Services
  Office. Before selecting course(s), they should consult the Program Coordinator. No more
  than 15 credits taken as a non-degree student may be counted toward a degree; students in
  this status should apply promptly for admission to the degree program.

<TOP OF PAGE>

FINANCIAL AID:

University-wide resources:
Graduate School Fellowships are awarded on a competitive basis
  to outstanding applicants who will enrol as full-time students. In 1997-98, Fellows
  received stipends of $13,000 plus full tuition remission for two semesters. Both incoming
  and continuing students are eligible to apply, through the Program Coordinator, for the
  annual competition. The Program nominates the best-qualified applicants, up to a maximum
  of three incoming and three returning students. Applicants must submit scores from the
  Graduate Record Examination (GRE), or an equivalent, approved examination (such as GMAT).
  They must sit for the GRE no later than October in order for their scores to be available
  by January. Application forms are available from the office of the Associate Dean for
  Research and Graduate Studies, Room 118, Olmsted Building, 948-6303. They must be
  complete, accompanied by all supporting materials, and in the hands of the Program
  Coordinator no later than 15 January.
Minority Graduate Scholars Awards are available to qualified entering
  minority graduate students. Applicants must be nominated by the Program. Stipends and
  support levels vary with the nature of the award. Recipients must enrol at least half-time
  (6 credits). For further information, consult the Associate Dean for Research and Graduate
  Studies (as above) and confer with the Program Coordinator.
Grants-in-Aid are remissions of full-time tuition for one semester,
  available to students already enrolled, especially those nearing completion of their
  programs. Criteria are financial need and academic promise. Applications are available
  from the Graduate School Fellowship Office, 317 Kern Graduate Building, University Park,
  PA 16802, (814) 865-2514.
Other resources may be available to military veterans, international
  students, and students with disabilities; for information, consult the Student Assistance
  Center staff, W-117 Olmsted, 948-6025.


Penn State Harrisburg resources:


The Mihailo Dordevic Graduate Scholarship, named in honor of a
  Professor Emeritus who died in 1991, has been established to offer partial support to
  qualified part- or full-time graduate students in financial need. Consult the Program
  Coordinator for information.
Board of Advisers Scholarships are competitive cash awards to promising
  graduate students in financial need nominated by their programs. They help support both
  full-time and part-time students. The competition is annual, in the spring; consult the
  Program Coordinator by February 15.
Work-study support is often available to graduate students who can
  document their financial need. It entails a specified number of hours of work, in the
  School of Humanities or elsewhere; responsibilities can range from research to clerical
  tasks. Information is available from the Financial Aid Office, W-112 Olmsted Building;
  948-6307.
Individual faculty grants occasionally include funds for graduate
  student assistance. Consult the Program Coordinator and inquire in the Research and
  Graduate Studies office on campus to learn of such opportunities. 

<TOP OF PAGE>

PROGRAM
REQUIREMENTS:

The Program offers students flexibility in choosing courses that
  suit their particular interests and goals. Within the framework of course distribution,
  all but two required interdisciplinary courses (HUM 500 and HUM 560) and the Master's
  Production (HUM 580) are chosen by students, in consultation with their advisers, from the
  range of options available.
All students must complete 30 credits, at least 18 of which must
  be at the 500 (graduate) level. Numerous 400-level courses are available to supplement
  graduate course offerings. A 3.0 average is required for graduation, with successful
  completion of an interdisciplinary master's production.
Foundation course: All students should take




HUM 500, Research Methods and Scholarly Issues
        in the Humanities, as soon as possible upon entering the program. This required course
        introduces students to techniques of graduate-level research and to critical concepts in
        the various disciplines and interdisciplinary study.





Single discipline courses are available as




HUM 515, Seminar (repeatable for a maximum of 9
        credits). 





The subtitle varies by discipline: e.g., Art History or
  Literature. There follows a more specific short description: e.g., Art History:
  Impressionism to Surrealism. Other single-discipline courses are available at the
  400-level.
Other Humanities courses include


HUM 530, Seminar in Comparative Arts;

HUM 590, Colloquium (repeatable when the topic
        varies);

HUM 596, Individual Studies (repeatable for a
        maximum of 9 credits); and

HUM 597, Special Topics (repeatable when the
        topic varies).



Not all courses are offered every year; some appear in alternate
  years.


Concentration requirement: Students should take courses in two principal fields
  of interest, so as to be able to explore critical issues and approaches in each area and
  ensure that they have sufficient breadth of expertise to undertake an interdisciplinary
  master's production.
Recommended courses: Most students should take at least one of the following
  multi-disciplinary courses:




HUM 525, Studies in Aesthetics;

HUM 535, Topics in Cultural and Intellectual
        History.

Capstone course: Toward the end
        of their course work (after completing at least 21 credits), all students take

HUM 560, Interrelations in the Humanities,
        which focusses on the theory and practice of interdisciplinary scholarship, in preparation
        for their work on interdisciplinary master's productions. Students enrolling for this
        course should have a 3.0 grade-point average and defined topics for their productions.





Master's production: The program culminates with




HUM 580, Master's Production,
        an interdisciplinary scholarly or creative project, usually an extended research paper.
        Some students, already skilled in a creative or performing art, may with their committees'
        approval undertake a creative production (performance or exhibit), accompanied by a
        briefer academic essay on the scholarly or interpretive content or significance of the
        creative work. A proposal for a creative production must be accompanied by demonstration
        of the student's advanced ability in the appropriate creative field, satisfactory to the
        faculty skilled in that area or to outside consultants chosen by the student's supervisory
        committee. See the section on the Master's Production Prospectus Guide, below. The
        supervisory committee's approval of a prospectus is required before a student can register
        for HUM 580.





Course descriptions: Specific course descriptions written by the faculty are
  provided each semester. They are available in the School of Humanities Office during the
  registration period.


Program style guide: All written work submitted should follow the guidelines described
  in The MLA Style Manual. Copies are available in the Bookstore.


Internship: Students wishing careers in community college teaching may benefit from a
  supervised internship, offered in conjunction with Harrisburg Area Community College, and
  available as 




HUM 550, Junior College Teaching Internship.
        If you wish to take this option, plan for it at least 6 months in advance and when
        most course work is complete. Placement is not automatic; it depends on the Program's
        recommendation, HACC's needs, and their faculty's assessment of individual applicants'
        credentials. Most interns teach writing courses. Applicants must demonstrate preparation
        and/or experience appropriate to the course they expect to teach. HACC encourages
        prospective interns in composition to participate in the annual Capital Area Writing
        Project's Summer Institute, held here. Consult your advisor or the Program Coordinator
        early in your program.




<TOP OF PAGE>


Independent Studies:
Independent Studies courses address subjects not covered in
  regular course offerings. They require advance consent from the professor who will direct
  the study, the advisor, and the Program Coordinator. The course goals can vary: e.g.,
  systematic reading in a particular field, or research using a specific method. After
  student and professor agree on the course plan, the student prepares a comprehensive
  description (see below). Copies go to the student, the professor, and the student's file;
  the original goes to the Registrar when the student enrolls for the course. Petitions must
  be complete and specific and accompanied by appropriate detailed plans, bibliographies,
  etc., in order to be approved.



PETITION FOR INDEPENDENT STUDY





496 Semester Year
HUM 596 Current date
Student Semester classification
Title and description of study
Study objectives
Study procedures
Syllabus (if applicable): attach separately.
Bibliography (if applicable): attach separately.
Expected number of meetings with study
        director:


APPROVAL SIGNATURES:
Independent study director
Student's assigned adviser
Jurisdictional program head



<TOP OF PAGE>


Transfer Credits
The university allows for up to ten credits for approved
  courses to be transferred from other accredited universities. Such courses should be
  graduate-level courses related to the Humanities. Such courses need to have been taken
  within five years of the petition of transfer and the student should have received a
  "B" or better in them. The staff assistant will provide you with information for
  applying for transfer credits.
It is also possible for you to take courses that count toward
  your program at the University Park campus and other Big Ten universities. You will need
  approval for these courses from your adviser and the program coordinator.

<TOP OF PAGE>


ADVISING:


Assigned Advisers:
Students should work closely with their assigned faculty advisers
  to develop coherent programs of study that meet their individual needs. Newly-admitted
  students should meet with their advisers early on to discuss their interests, strengths,
  and weaknesses, and objectives. Together, students and advisers develop a program of
  study, identifying particular courses, topics, or disciplines to be included. This plan
  then guides the student's selection of courses. It can of course be amended as needed.
  Should the student's interests change, it is also possible to change advisers by
  contacting the Program Coordinator. Students should see their advisers at least once every
  semester, to discuss their progress and plans. 
In planning your fall course schedule, consult your adviser
  before the end of the spring semester, as faculty often are not available during the
  summer. Also, consult your professor(s) well in advance if you wish advice on independent
  study during the summer. Faculty members are on 9-month contracts; summers are their time
  to pursue their own research projects. 
After obtaining your adviser's signature you can register your
  course choices at Enrollment Services in the Swatara Building. You should not be closed
  out of a Humanities graduate course. A new service is the ability to register by phone.
  See the Schedule of Classes for instructions. The Schedule of Classes can be purchased
  from the bookstore or accessed on your computer through the Penn State Service and OASIS
  system. Remember, too, that specific course descriptions are available in the Humanities
  suite each semester during the registration period.

<TOP OF PAGE>


Forming a master's production committee:
While new students may think of the master's production as a
  distant goal, they should decide on its topic as soon as possible, so they can select
  appropriate courses. Once this decision is made, students should select faculty to serve
  on their master's production committees. This committee normally consists of two faculty
  members: a faculty member who serves as chair (who must be a member of the graduate
  faculty and a program faculty member) and another faculty member whose expertise is
  relevant to the master's production topic. Some students may wish to include a third
  faculty member, from Humanities or from American Studies or outside the school. See
  "The faculty," above, or consult your adviser or the Coordinator for advice in
  choosing committee members.

<TOP OF PAGE>


PROGRAM OF STUDY WORKSHEET




Goals: 
Areas of concentration: 
SUGGESTED PROGRAM OF STUDY: PROGRESS TOWARD DEGREE:
Pertinent transfer credit:* Approved transfer credits:
Required courses: 500-level courses (at least 18 cr.):
HUM 500, Research Methods HUM 500 
HUM 560, Interrelations Desired fields/topics/courses: 
HUM 560 
HUM 580 
400-level crs. (maximum 12 cr.):
Individual Studies (up to 9 cr.): 
HUM 580, Master's Production
Internship (credits not counted toward degree):
Total required credits: 30.




*Transfer credits: A maximum of 10 credits appropriate to
  the student's program of study may be transferred from other institutions. Courses taken
  before admission here may be considered if they are graduate-level courses, taken within
  the past five years at an accredited university and listed on a graduate transcript; the
  student must have earned grades of "B" or better; and the student's academic
  adviser must attest that the courses are applicable to the program of study here. See the
  Humanities staff assistants in W-356 for the proper form, to be submitted through the
  adviser and Program Coordinator to the Graduate School.

<TOP OF PAGE>


TROUBLE-SHOOTING:


Deferred Grades:
A student who needs extra time to complete a course should
  consult with the professor as soon as possible, to request an extension and plan a
  schedule for submitting the late work. Forms for requesting deferred grades, available
  from the Registrar, require signature by the course instructor and the Program Coordinator
  or School Director. The Graduate School does not approve deferrals intended to allow
  students to improve their grades.
A deferral extends through the ninth week of the next semester, when it changes
  to "F" unless the professor has filed a grade. Students needing more time to
  make up the deferred work should consult with their professors, who should apply through
  the Coordinator and the Associate Dean for Research and Graduate Studies for extension
  until a specific date. Without an extension, the Graduate School may deny course credit
  for late work.


No grade changes may be made more than one year after the end of any course, by
  Graduate School policy.
Extensions for prolonged programs:
Students are expected to complete their programs within six
  years. This time is more than sufficient in most cases. Anyone needing more time should
  request an extension from the Program Coordinator. Programs longer than eight years
  require that the Coordinator make formal application to the Graduate School, stating
  reasons why an extension should be granted. Evidence of progress toward the degree (e.g.,
  an approved production draft) may be required to accompany such an application.
Resuming Study:
Students who enrol every semester (not counting summers) maintain
  "continuous registration." International students, whose visas depend on
  continuing full-time study, must maintain continuous registration; they should
  consult the International Student Adviser about special requirements that apply to them.
Other students may find it necessary to skip a semester. In this
  event, they should inform their advisers and seek advice before their next registration.
  If a student skips two or more semesters, he/she must receive "Permission to Resume
  Study" from the Program Coordinator before they can register for courses again. This
  one-page form is available from Enrollment Services (948-6250).
Students wishing to resume study after a gap of several years
  should consult their advisers and/or the Coordinator. They should make specific plans for
  finishing their programs, along with an anticipated timetable, for application (through
  the Coordinator) to the Graduate School. They may be required to undertake additional
  course work, to refresh their competence.

<TOP OF PAGE>

LIBRARY
RESOURCES:

The Heindel Library offers Penn State's second-largest collection
  of books, periodicals, microforms, and other materials, and the assistance of expert
  reference librarians. Circulation desk staff maintain materials placed on reserve for
  courses, and a collection of videocassettes. The Library has its own Software Information
  Center, which lends a variety of programs. The interlibrary loan service provides access
  to materials at other libraries.
LIAS, Penn State's electronic catalogue of books, serial titles,
  and similar materials, offers access to the holdings of all Penn State campuses, from
  terminals in the library or the Computer Center and through a modem from off-campus. The
  brochure "LIAS: Remote Access Guide" describes how you can browse LIAS from your
  home computer.
CD-ROM databases offer listings of articles in a variety of
  subject areas: the MLA (on literature, language, and related fields), ERIC (on education
  and related fields), GPO (government publications), PsycLIT (psychological articles), PAIS
  (Public Affairs Information Service), and others. They often allow very specific searches,
  e.g., to request materials that deal with both Surrealism and psychoanalysis, or Charles
  Dickens and deconstruction. Many additional bibliographies are in the library's reference
  collection.
Many materials are available on microform, to save space: the
  Library of American Civilization, runs of many newspapers from the eighteenth century to
  the present, Dissertation Abstracts, numerous journals, and much else. Reference
  librarians can orient you and demonstrate the use of microform readers, including some
  with printers.
The Alice Marshall Collection, housed in the Swatara Building,
  contains books, newspapers, magazines, postcards, and ephemera pertaining to American
  women's history and lives. Students are invited to use this collection for research
  projects and master's productions.
Other libraries: The State Library in the Forum Building in downtown Harrisburg
  is open to any state resident and holds an impressive collection, including some
  periodicals not in the Heindel Library. Open on weekdays from 10:30 to 4:00, its
  electronic catalog, LUIS, is also accessible by modem. Area college libraries (Franklin
  and Marshall, Dickinson, Millersville, Messiah, and others) often have extensive
  collections in humanities areas. Their holdings are listed in a CD-ROM catalog in our
  reference room, and Penn State students with current IDs have borrowing privileges there.

<TOP OF PAGE>

OTHER RESOURCES:

The College Computer Center, on the third floor of Olmsted's west
  wing, offers many services to enrolled students: use of terminals and printers for word
  processing and other work, access to Penn State bulletin boards and electronic mail, and
  training in the use of equipment and programs.
The School of Humanities Slide Library includes thousands of
  slides of works of art and architecture from around the world, with special strength in
  U.S. and Europe since the Renaissance. Graduate students may check out slides for short
  periods, upon submission of complete lists to the professor they are working with.
Studio facilities in television, radio, and photography are
  available to those who have the necessary training in equipment use. A studio manager
  provides orientation and information. The art studio is available to those taking art
  courses or by arrangement with Professor Linda Ross.
Instructional and Information Technology (E-302) loans video and
  audio equipment for presentations and research and arranges for rental of films and
  cassettes from other film libraries. Its staff can also assist students who need to
  produce materials for presentations.

<TOP OF PAGE>

THE
MASTER'S PRODUCTION:

The Humanities Master's Program accepts two types of Master's
  Productions. The first is a substantial, well-researched thesis on an interdisciplinary
  topic; the second is a creative production (such as an art exhibit or a book of poems or
  short stories) with an accompanying essay. Examples of recent productions are listed
  below. The process of completing the Master's Production takes planning and close work
  with committee members. Students first prepare a production prospectus, then move to the
  drafting stage, and finally present the bound copies for approval. Each of these stages is
  outlined more fully below. Most students take at least two semesters to complete the
  production; they should stay in contact with their committee members and also keep the
  Program Coordinator apprised of their progress as they move toward completing the
  production. If, at any point in the process, students have questions or difficulties, they
  should immediately consult their committee chair and/or the Program Coordinator.
Selected Master's Production Topics:
These titles of recent productions suggest, but by no means
  exhaust, the range of interdisciplinary research undertaken by students in the Program:




"Subverting the Myth of the American
        Family: A Comparative Analysis of Family Portrayals in the Works of Sam Shepard and Eric
        Fischl"

"A One Woman Play: Where Are Their
        Voices?: Portraying the Lives of Schuylkill County Women" (creative production)

"The Gothic Revival and Harrisburg's
        Catholic Churches"

"A Discipline Based Art Program for Middle
        Elementary Students: The Influence of Primitivism on Pablo Picasso"

"Wishing He I Served Were Black: The Theme
        of a Black Christ in the Harlem Renaissance"

"Harvesting the Dew: A Literary Nurse
        Bearing Witness to Pain" (creative production)

"George Eliot's The Mill on the Floss:
        A Comparative Psychological Analysis Using the Theories of David Bakan, Albert Bandura,
        Erik Erikson, and the Timing-of- Events Model"

"Assemblers of Dreams: Flaubert and Moreau
        and Their Evil Women"

"Nikolay G. Chernyshevsky's Novel What
        Is to be Done? and the Genesis of Russian Socialism"

"Voyage into the Subliminal Sea: An
        Exhibit of Art Quilts Examining the Seams and Layers of Feminist Philosophies and Women's
        Experience" (creative production)




<TOP OF PAGE>


The Master's Production Prospectus:
Students planning a master's production should submit a
  prospectus, or proposal, to the members of their supervisory committees, who will evaluate
  it and suggest any needed changes. Once all parties have agreed on the project, they
  should sign the "Approval of Master's Production Proposal" form in the student's
  file and provide a copy for the student. An approved prospectus is required before a
  student can register for HUM 580.

Prospectus: "A brief sketch or plan of some proposed...undertaking,
    containing the details of the general plan or design...and such other details as may
    assist in judging the feasibility of the undertaking."
--Webster's New Universal Unabridged Dictionary, 2nd
    ed. (1983)



A prospectus serves both the graduate student and the supervisory
  committee: the student, because it requires systematic preparation and thought in
  developing a focus and argument and plan; the faculty, because it provides a substantial
  statement which they can evaluate. It demonstrates the student's intentions specifically
  and in detail, and should provide evidence of the student's ability to complete the work
  well and within a reasonable length of time. It may of course be amended as needed.
No single prospectus form is appropriate for everyone in this
  diverse program. Graduate students should consult with their committees about the
  preferred form and content of their proposals. In general a prospectus should have the
  following qualities: 




It should define the topic or issue(s)
        to be addressed, offer a statement of purpose for the production, and explain
        the interdisciplinary nature of the work and any theoretical or analytical
        perspective(s) to be used.

It should discuss the works, ideas, or
        events to be examined, their pertinence to the production's purpose, and the method(s)
        to be used to study them; for creative productions, it should provide information on the
        student's creative abilities and the availability of needed resources for the creative
        work.

It should include a plan of the production
        e.g., a series of questions to be pursued; an outline of chapters, with their contents
        described in brief paragraphs; a series of stages to be accomplished in a creative
        production, along with the methods for judging them; or a similar plan appropriate to the
        topic. In short, a proposal should demonstrate knowledge of the scope of the subject, a
        cogent and clearly defined approach to it, and a general sense of the desired results.
        (The specific results of the inquiry, of course, will not yet be perceptible.)



Students wishing to pursue a creative
  production should understand that these are inherently quite demanding. Since this
  program does not offer graduate courses in creative fields, such students must have the
  requisite skills BEFORE beginning the production; that is no place for on-the-job
  training. They must demonstrate their ability in the appropriate creative activity,
  adequate to independent master's level work, to the satisfaction of the faculty member(s)
  expert in that field--before their prospectuses can be approved. Their proposals must also
  include plans for a brief (25-30 page) academic essay to explain the academic or
  interpretive content or significance of the creative work.


It should include a brief bibliography
        (one to two pages) listing some of the most pertinent scholarly or critical literature on
        the topic.

It should include an anticipated timetable
        for completion of the work.





Prospectuses normally emerge after discussions between student
  and supervisory committee members. Students at this stage should be in close contact with
  their faculty advisers. Prospectuses aren't binding; any aspect can be changed by mutual
  consent of student and committee. Once a prospectus is approved, a copy of it should be
  attached to the approval form in the student's file; any revision should also be filed.

<TOP OF PAGE>


Beginning work on the Master's Production:
Register for HUM 580, Master's Production--a one-time-only
  obligation--after your prospectus is approved. Allow a realistic time-span in which to
  work. This project will require more initiative and independent work than any seminar
  paper. Productions typically undergo several stages of revision over an extended time
  period. If you'll be working over several semesters, consider registering for one or two
  credits at a time, to maintain full access to the library and other University resources.
  Consult your committee members about how to submit material. Most committee members want
  to see several drafts of the production well in advance of the time you are planning to
  graduate. 


When you register for the production in a semester, you will 