






EDU 5565 Human Relations syllabus


 






The College of
St. Scholastica

EDU5565
Human Relations
Syllabus
(Revised October 2000)






 






Instructor


Course Outcomes




Course Context


Course Materials




Description


 Legal Section




Program Outcomes


Assessment/Grading






 








Instructor: 





Dr. Margaret Scheibe

Media Director

Proctor Public Schools







CSS Office:

Phone:



2129 Tower Hall

Work: 628-4930 
Home: 724-1519


email: Office
Home
mscheibe@proctor.k12.mn.us
dunmullen@aol.com





Credits:





2 Semester 







Course Context:





This course is designed to prepare practicing teachers to recognize and
understand the similarities and differences between and among various cultural,
racial, economic and gender groups and to promote systemic proactive social
change by recognizing human biases in education and by creating learning
environments which contribute to student self-esteem and inclusion. It
further challenges students to explore, assess, understand and reflect
on their own personal biases and prejudices concerning these groups and
to develop respect for human diversity and human rights through curriculum
and instruction. 







Description:





EDU 5565 explores the consciousness of various cultural, racial, ethnic,
economic, and gender populations and the process of oppression as it has
affected these identified groups. Students explore their own biases and
prejudices, and develop and utilize personal intervention strategies to
create positive, proactive instructional materials and contexts for the
effective and appropriate instructional inclusion of genders, cultures,
races, and exceptionalities. Students will understand, identify and integrate
strategies to intervene on dehumanizing practices in group and individual
instructional settings. This course is framed in the research that addresses
positive cultural diversity and multiculturalism in educational settings. 








 









Course Materials







Texts: 




Campbell, D. E. (1996). Choosing democracy: A practical guide to multicultural
education.

     New York: Merrill. 

Carnes, J. (1995). Teaching tolerance. Montgomery, AL: Southern
Poverty Law Center. 
Carnegie Council on Adolescent Development. (1996).
Great transitions:
Preparing adolescents
     for a new century.
New York: Carnegie
Foundation. 




 


Other Materials:



A selection of three of the following films will be viewed
by the student as part of unit requirements: 




Primal Mind, Thunderheart, A Class Divided, School Ties, The Mission,
El Norte, Cry Freedom, Raisin in the Sun, Autobiography of Miss Jane Pitman,
Summer of My German Soldier, Where the Spirit Lives, Family Gathering,
Amistad, Rosewood, The Milagro Bean Field War, Soul Food, PowWow Highway.









 









Legal Section







Academic Honesty:



All assignments will be expected to meet standards for academic
honesty. Lessons, activities, articles, and manuscripts are the intellectual
property of their developers. Copying the work of others without due credit
is theft. Copying of part of other students' assignments or examinations
without permission and cited credit is also theft. All sources must be
adequately and appropriately cited using an accepted form for style such
as APA or MLA. Work not cited correctly will earn a failing grade for the
assignment and/or the course. 


Incompletes: 



No incompletes will be assigned for this course except by
special arrangement with the instructor. 


ALL
COURSE WORK IS DUE ON the last day of the semester of enrollment.


NO MATERIALS will be accepted after this
date without prior permission of the instructor. 









 









EDU 5565 Program Outcomes







3.
Diverse Learners: The teacher understands how students differ
in their approaches to learning and creates instructional opportunities
that are adapted to learners from diverse cultural backgrounds and exceptionalities. 


5.
Learning Environment:  The teacher uses an understanding
of individual and group motivation and behavior to create a learning environment
that encourages positive social interaction, active engagement in learning,
and self-motivation.


7.
Planning Instruction: The teacher plans and manages instruction
based upon knowledge of subject matter, students, the community, and curriculum
plans.


9.
Reflection and Professional Development: The teacher is a reflective
practitioner who continually evaluates the effects of her/his choices and
actions on others (students, parents, and other professionals in the learning
community) and who actively seeks out opportunities to grow professionally.


10.
Collaboration, Ethics, and Relationships: The teacher communicates
and interacts with parents/guardians, families, school colleagues, and
the community to support students' learning and well-being. 









 









EDU 5565 Course Outcomes


Students will demonstrate the following program and course outcomes.








Outcomes                                                                       
Assessment





1.
Develop lessons, units, and instructional material that identify and
promote the contributions of various cultural, racial and economic groups
in society. (3,7)
1.
Unit Requirements, Journal responses, Intervention Strategies
Paper.


2.
Identify, describe, and intervene in dehumanizing biases and prejudices
in educational materials and settings. (3,9) 
2.
Unit Requirements, Personal Journal.


3.
Develop and implement proactive strategies for positive social change
in the promotion of effective human relationships between and among diverse
groups within and outside the school setting. (3) 
3.
Personal Journal, Intervention Strategies Paper.


4.
Recognize, describe and intervene in one's own process of dehumanization
as it affects children, peers, and colleagues within and outside the school
setting. (3,9,10)
4.



Personal Journal, Intervention Strategies Paper, Unit Requirements.




5.
Recognize, describe and intervene in one's own process of dehumanization
as it affects the individual as a member of the oppressing/oppressed group.
(3,7,9)
5.
Personal Journal, , Intervention Strategies Paper.


6.
Review, critique and integrate current research, popular and documentary
film, and actions and objects of popular culture into lesson and unit planning.
(3,7) 
6.
Unit Requirements, Intervention Strategies Paper, Personal
Journal.


7.
Understand how social groups function and influence people,
and how people influence groups. (5)
7.
Unit Requirements, Intervention Strategies Paper, Personal
Journal.


8.
Understand how participation supports commitment. (5)
8.
Volunteer Report.









 









EDU 5565 Assessment


The following projects and assignments will be used to assess the program
outcomes:





 


1. Unit Requirements: There are three units
in this course. 



Each unit will require the student to read, view, or participate in
the assignments and activities of the unit.



These will include reading assigned texts and articles, preparing lessons
according to the five approaches identified in the texts and participating
in assigned activities. 



At the end of each unit the student will be expected to prepare a reflective
paper/project showing integration and reflection of the unit material and
responding to the unit questions. 



The student will be expected to use clearly identified and cited material
from the assignments to inform the unit materials. 









2. Personal Class Journal: Journal of assigned texts. 



This is an active course which will require the student to reflect
on and explore personal and professional attitudes and ideas. 



In the first journal entry, the student will present a personal
assessment of his/her own biases and prejudices concerning the various
groups we will be studying and will clearly identify at least four personal
learning goals the student sets for this course. 



The student will use this as a base for reflection and self-assessment
throughout the course. 



All other journal entries should reflect on the "what" of the course
activities and assignments, and on the student's personal feelings, insights,
and reactions to these activities and discussions in relation to the course
goals and the student's personal goals. The journal entries for each Unit
should reflect and discusses the Questions for Focus for that Unit showing
knowledge from the readings, information and insights from self-examination
and evaluation, and connection to course and personal learning goals.








3. Volunteer Report 



The student is required to spend 10 hours volunteering in a
setting appropriate to the intent and content of the course. 



A brief (1-2 page) reflective paper is required. 



Signed volunteer form mentioned under General Course Requirements. 








4. Intervention Strategies Paper (6-8 pages) 



In this paper, the student will be expected to do two things.



1.
First the student will: 






Identify the learning goals he/she established at the
beginning of the course.






Re-evaluate each goal.





Describe personal intervention strategies used throughout the course.





Identify at least one strategy chosen for on-going assessment and accomplishment.




2.


Second, the student will: 







Identify the larger societal issues discussed in the
course.






Select at least 2 of these issues.





Describe personal and professional intervention strategies used throughout
the semester which could be applied to each of those issues.





Present these in the form of a case analysis of their impact in a school
setting. 








5.  Conversations with the instructor



Contact with the class and the instructor will take place
in THREE ways. You are responsible for meet each of the following three
requirements:



1.
You will be required to participate in online class discussions
at least three times during the semester. These discussion will last about
2 hours and will be on specific topics that relate to the Unit requirements
of the course. Times and content of the discussion will be posted on the
class Bulletin Board.



2.
You will be expected to contact the instructor personally
at least once during the semester.





Please use the email to make an appointment to meet with the instructor.





Meet either online in the Chat Room, or by phone.





Expect the conversation to last at least 15 minutes.





Be prepared to discuss your progress in the course, concerns or questions
you might have, and ideas you are gathering from the course activities.



3.
You will be required to attend at least two Open Chat Room
hours for open course discussion.





Open Chat will occur at least four times in the semester. 





The instructor will set times for Chat through the Bulletin Board and
by email directly to the students. 





Be prepared to discuss course content, reflections, activities etc.
during this time.








 
 
 






Evaluation/Grading



This is a pass/no-pass course.  Attainment of 85% is required
for a pass (P). 
Individual assignments will be evaluated using the following point
system: 
 


Assignments

Pts



1. Unit requirements.

310



2. Personal journal.

150



3. Personal intervention strategies paper.

100



4. Volunteer experience evaluation.

50



5. Instructor contact.

160




Total points


770











EDU
5565 Home Page


