
  Program onCitizenship Development for A Global Age   Program on Citizenship Development for A Global Age  The Mershon Center is a multidisciplinary research organization at TheOhio State University.  The Center's Program on Citizenship Development for a Global Age (CDGA)draws upon university scholarship to help strengthen education about democraticcitizenship, international security, and world affairs.  Richard C. Remy servesas Director of CDGA.  Gregory E. Hamot serves as the Assistant Director ofCDGA. The goals of CDGA are:  		to increase the capacity of educators and schools to understandand teachabout issues related to international and national security;   		to promote the development of education for democraticcitizenship inPoland and other nations of Central Europe;  		to initiate projects that will build through education thefoundations forthe development of democratic civil society in Russia; and  		to strengthen geographic education and the geographic literacyof Ohioelementary, middle, and high school students and teachers. CDGA Faculty Associates undertake projects related to these goals. The projectsmay range from the  preparation of a report, journal article, or book by oneindividual to multi-year efforts involving large numbers of people andcollaboration between the Mershon Center and other organizations.    	CURRENT CDGA PROJECTS   Book on Lessons on International Peace and Conflict Resolution for SocialStudies Courses Lessons and other resource materials prepared by international relationsscholars and teachers for use by teachers of high school social studiescourses.  Book on Teaching About International Conflict and PeaceOriginal essays by international relations scholars and teacher educators onkey dimensions of conflict management aimed to help bring a global perspectiveto social studies teaching methods courses.  Education for Democratic Citizenship in PolandA multi-year project of CDGA and the Polish Ministry of National Education toestablish civic education in Polish schools, promote a national dialogue amongPolish educators on the meaning of democratic citizenship, and link Americanand Polish civic educators. The Project began with five activities respondingto urgent needs identified by Polish educational leaders.    	Curriculum Guides - "Building A Foundation for Civic Education"	Curriculum Guides presenting instructional objectives and content outlinesfora primary school and a high school civics course being distributed nationallyin Poland.  	Primary School Civics Course - "Citizenship for Democracy"	Student and teacher materials for a primary school civics course (grades 6,7,8) that will be taken by 600,000 students a year; pilot testing in Poland hasbegun.    	Undergraduate College Course - "Schools and Democratic Society"	Course syllabus for pre-service teachers applying the principles of democracyto the organization and operation of schools; syllabus revision nearingcompletion in Poland.   	Network of Centers for Civic and Economic Education	Five regional centers have been established in Warsaw, Gdansk, Krakow,Lublin,and Wroclaw to provide continuing support through professional development andexchange activities.  	International Conference on Civic Education -- Warsaw, December 10-12,1993 	Educators and scholars from across Poland will learn about Projectmaterials and exchange ideas on civic education with American scholars andeducators.  	Three new projects not called for in the original plan are now underway.  	Book on Civic Education for Democracy: Lessons From Poland	Original essays by American and Polish scholars analyzing the conceptual,educational, and policy implications of the Project in light of the globaldemocratic revolution.  	Research on Civic Education, Political Socialization, and Democratization   	We are developing, with Polish social scientists, acollaborative research program.   	Training School Administrators in Democratic Principles 	We are planning a nationwide program to help administrators learn how basicdemocratic principles apply to the organization and operation of publicschools.   	Building The Foundations for Civil Society in Russia	This project is developing linkages with the Institute of Philosophy of theRussian Academy of Sciences in order to pursue collaborative research,education, and publication activities for academic years 1993 through 1995.Held a one-week institute in Plios, Russia in August, 1993, for philosophyprofessors and teacher educators.   	Book on Education for Democracy in the United States and TheWorld	Essays by American, German, and South African scholars on such topics as therole of civic education in building and preserving democracies, the connectionbetween constitutionalism and civic education; the tension between pluralismand the need for national unity and identity.     The Ohio Geographic AllianceWith support from the National Geographic Society and the Ohio Legislature, theOSU Department of Geography and CDGA are working with eleven geographydepartments in universities across Ohio to mount teacher training, curriculumdevelopment, and applied research activities that will strengthen the teachingof geography in schools throughout Ohio. Conducts an annual Summer Institute atOSU, regional institutes throughout the year for Ohio teachers, and the OhioGeography Bee.   	RECENT CDGA PUBLICATIONS  Teaching About European Unification (Bloomington, IN: ERICClearinghouse for the Social Studies/Social Science Education, forthcoming)Steven Miller, Editor.Original essays for social studies educators by European and American scholarsanalyzing the political, geographic, economic, cultural, and historicaldimensions of European unification.  Preparing for Leadership: A Young Adult's Guide to Leadership Skills in aGlobal Age (Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 1993) Robert B. Woyach.Orients young people in their quest to become more effective civic leaders withspecial attention to the demands of leadership in a global age through theexploration of nine key leadership principles.  Projekt Programu Nauczania Ksztalcenia Obywatelskiego [ProposedCivic Education Curriculum Guide for Primary and Secondary Schools] (PolishMinistry of National Education, 1993)Presents a rationale, objectives, and content outlines for new civics courses.In Polish.  Projekt Programu Nauczania Ksztalcenia Obywatelskiego [ProposedCivic Education Curriculum Guide for Primary and Secondary Schools: SampleLesson Plans (Polish Ministry of National Education, 1993)Sixteen classroom lessons by Polish educators on such topics as civicleadership, the Polish constitution, student rights, and elections. InPolish.  Wybor Tekstow Pomocniczych Dla Nauczycieli KsztakceniaObywatelskiego [Selected Supplementary Materials for Civic EducationTeachers] (Polish Ministry of National Education, 1993)Thirty six readings from the work of leading Polish scholars on such topics asthe rule of law, human rights and the Helsinki Commission, and privatization.In Polish.  Mershon National Security Series  Richard C. Remy, Series EditorSeven books of teaching resources for high school educators containing 148classroom lessons as well as background material for teachers and teachereducators (Addison-Wesley Publishers)  	-	Essentials of National Security: A Conceptual Guidebook forEducators	-	Teaching About National Security: Instructional Strategies	-	American Government and National Security	-	American History and National Security	-	Economics and National Security	-	World Geography and National Security	-	World History and National Security   Approaches to World Studies: A Handbook for Curriculum Planners(Needham Heights, MA: Allyn and Bacon, 1989), Richard C. Remy and Robert B.Woyach, Editors.Scholars analyze five major, contending approaches to a high school worldstudies course; designed to help educators make decisions about the goals,organization, and content of such courses.  Lessons on the Constitution: Supplements to High School Courses inAmerican History, Government and Civics  (Boulder, CO: Social ScienceEducation Consortium and Project `87, American Historical Association/AmericanPolitical Science Association, 1985), John J. Patrick and Richard C. Remy.Sixty lessons to supplement textbook material on constitutional topics in highschools American history and American government courses prepared for the APSAand AHA.    	CDGA FACULTY ASSOCIATES 1994-95  Vern Cunningham, Professor Emeritus of Education, OSU; MarkDenham, Assistant Professor of Political Science, University of Toledo;Patti Denney, Ohio Coordinator, We the People...The Citizen andthe Constitution; M. Eugene Gilliom, Professor of Social StudiesEducation, OSU; James E. Harf, Professor of Political Science;Merry Merryfield, Assistant Professor of Social StudiesEducation, OSU; Steven L. Miller, Associate Professor of SocialStudies Education, OSU; Andrew Oldenquist, Professor Emeritus ofPhilosophy, OSU; John J. Patrick, Professor of Education, IndianaUniversity; Kazimierz Slomczynski, Professor of Sociology, OSU;W. Randy Smith, Associate Professor of Geography, OSU;Jacek Strzemieczny, Director of Teacher Training, Polish Ministryof National Education; Judith Torney-Purta, Professor ofPsychology, University of Maryland; Robert B. Woyach, ResearchAssociate and Political Scientist, Mershon Center.    	FINANCIAL SUPPORT In addition to continuing support from the Mershon Center, CDGA activities havereceived funding from various agencies, including the:   	Ford Foundation		 									Martha HoldenJennings Foundation  	Danforth Foundation										NationalInstitute of Education 	W. Alton Jones Foundation								Joyce MertzGilmore Foundation 	National Endowment for the Humanities				U.S. EducationDepartment 	Department of Defense									United StatesInformation Agency 	Columbus Foundation										NationalGeographic Society 	National Endowment for Democracy					U.S. Institute forPeace 	Pew Charitable Trusts          