


Vernon College GOVT 2302 Syllabus






Vernon CollegeDistance Learning
GOVT 2301
American Government I
Syllabus






Department:Social Sciences
Credit Hours:3
Hours per Week:Lecture: 3
	    
	     Lab: 0
	    
	     Combined: 3







CatalogDescription

RequiredBackground

Texts andReferenceMaterials

Method ofInstruction

CourseContent

LearnerOutcomes

Assessment









Catalog Description


        Surveys the theory of politics and government in America at the national, state, and 
local levels with special attention to Texas. Includes political theory, the U.S. and Texas 
constitutions, democracy, federalism, political parties and ideologies, and civil liberties. 
     
        Prerequisites: Passing score on TASP in reading and writing or grade of C or better in 
the following courses: READ 0302 or 0305 and ENGL 0302 or 0305.
          
Top









Required Background


        High school graduate, successful completion of GED, or concurrently enrolled high 
        school student.  Recommend that a student transferring to a four-year institution take 
        HIST 1301 and HIST 1302 prior to enrolling in GOVT 2301 and GOVT 2302.
  
Top










Texts and Reference Materials


	The following materials are required for this class:
	Textbooks (available in the Vernon College Bookstore):

Burns, James MacGregor, et. al., Government by the People (National Version,
	2001-2002 Edition.  Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, Inc., 2002.
	Halter, Gary M.  Government and Politics of Texas:  A Comparative View 
	(Third Edition).  New York: McGraw-Hill, 2002

Software Required


A current browser with e-mail capability, Windows 95 or 98, and a word processing program.


Note:  Microsoft Word 97 or WordPerfect 6.1 are good choices for a word processing 
program.  Documents sent as e-mail attachments must be prepared using one of these 
programs.  Do not use Microsoft Works.

The College does not provide an Internet account for this class.  Students must
already be connected with an Internet provider.
	

Top










Method of Instruction



Lectures by instructor and guests
	Class discussion
	Use of appropriate multimedia materials
	


Top









Course Content




TOPICSTextbook and Chapter
1.Fundamentals of the AmericanPolitical Systems
Burns:	1, 4-6 & 22Halter:	1,4 & Epilogue
2.American Political Heritage
1. U.S. Constitution2. Texas Constitution
 Burns:	1 & 2Halter:	2 & 11
3.The Federal SystemBurns:	3
4.American Political Ideologies
and Parties
Burns:	4 & 7Halter:	3 & 5
5.Civil Liberties and Civil RightsBurns:	16-18



Top









Learner Outcomes



    
The purpose of this course is to prepare each student to be able to:
    
Understand the democratic method of governing in the American political system; and recognize the significant similarities and differences between this system and others.
Be able to explain activities of various types of participants in the American political system, including candidates, public officials, voters, and influencers: and be able to effectively participate in the American political system, including:
 A. Voting
B. Selecting a political party
C. Seeking political office
D. Conducting political campaigns
Be aware of the responsibilities and rights of American citizens.
Demonstrate familiarity with the concepts essential to an understanding of the U.S. and Texas governments; and be able to intelligently read, listen to, and view mass media reports about politics and public policy.
Define selected terms of political science and use them effectively in written and oral communications.
Describe the philosophy, historical origins, and development of the U.S. and Texas constitutions.
Understand the strengths and weaknesses of unitary, federal, and confederal systems of government.
Describe and contrast the powers exercised by the U.S. and Texas governments.
Explain and provide examples of the specific civil liberties and civil rights guaranteed to an individual residing in the United States.
Develop and utilize critical thinking skills to evaluate political ideologies and public policies.
Use computers, printed materials, and oral communications to obtain pertinent information and to analyze key issues related to American politics and government.

      

Top









Assessment



	Each student will demonstrate mastery of the stated learner outcomes both by 
	passing examinations administered and by reporting on independent research 
	conducted during the term.     
Top









Internet Course Information
Distance Learning Home Page
Public Notice

last updated July 11, 2001
disclaimer
copyright 2001-2002 Vernon College





