


Francis Graham Lee











-POLITICAL 
      SCIENCE DEPARTMENT


-CHAIRMAN


 -FRANCIS 
      GRAHAM LEE






FRANCIS 
          GRAHAM LEE, 
          a native of Boston, was educated at the Boston Latin School, received 
          his bachelor's degree from Boston College, and earned a Ph.D. in Political 
          Science from the University of Pennsylvania.
          He is currently Chairman of Political Science at Saint Joseph's University 
          in Philadelphia where he has also served as President of the Faculty 
          Senate, Dean of the University College, and Director of Graduate Programs. 
          He now serves as Coordinator of the University's 
          Washington Semester and Director of the Legal Studies (Para-Legal) 
          Program. In additional to these responsibilities, Lee serves as advisor 
          for the ETA NU Chapter of the national political science honor society, PI 
          SIGMA ALPHA. The chapter has been awarded grants three times 
          by the national office in recognition of outstanding achievements by 
          its student members. The chapter sponsors an annual distinguished lecture. 
          Past lecturers have included Anthony Cardinal Bevilacqua, Archbishop 
          of Philadelphia, the Honorable Lawrence Pierce, Judge of the United 
          States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit, and the Honorable Stephen 
          J McEwen, President Judges of the Superior Court of the Commonwealth 
          of Pennsylvania.

          Professor Lee's primary disciplinary specialty is American Constitutional 
          Law. In addition to courses in this area, which include a seminar on 
          religious liberty conducted in moot court format, Lee teaches a section 
          of the general introductory course in American Government and upper 
          division courses on Parties, Interest Groups & Voting Behavior as 
          well as a course on Philadelphia Politics. During the summer, Lee offers, 
          in alternate years, either a three week study tour of Canada (Quebec 
          City, Ottawa, and Toronto) which introduces students to Canadian 
          government and society POL 
          2391 or a four week study tour 
          of Greece examining issues of law and democracy POL 2041.






-Publications





Lee 
          is the author of four books: Neither Conservative nor Liberal, 
          a study of the Burger Court's decisions on civil rights and liberties, 
          Wall of Controversy, an examination of the different philosophies 
          of Supreme Court judges with regard to First Amendment controversies, 
          and All Imaginable Liberty a study of the historical and 
          legal development of the religious liberty clauses of the Constitution 
          which features articles by some of the nation's leading scholars on 
          the First Amendment, prepared as part of the University's Bicentennial 
          Observance. Dr. Lee has completed a new work on church and state in 
          America which focuses on fourteen significant issues that have shaped 
          church-state relations in America. Church-State Relations 
          was just published by Greenwood Press in May of 2002. Lee is also editing 
          a volume on the judicial opinions and legal writings of Chief Justice 
          William Howard Taft that is part of a larger eight volume series edited 
          by Professor David Burton of the History Department of Saint Joseph's 
          University for Ohio University Press. It is scheduled for publication 
          in 2003. Currently, Lee is under contract with ABC-CLIO for a book on 
          equal protection issues.





iAcademic 
        Associations & Activities





Dr. 
          Lee was a founder of the Pre-Law Advisors National Council, and is a 
          past President of the Northeast Association of Pre-Law Advisors, a former 
          Secretary Treasurer of the Association of Graduate Schools at Catholic 
          Colleges and Universities, and past president of the Ethnic Studies 
          Association. He currently edits NAPLA 
          Notes, the oldest journal serving the needs of pre-law advisors 
          and their students and is the author of the section on financial aid 
          in The Handbook for Pre-Law Advisors. 
          For the past six years, Dr. Lee has offered a workshop at the annual 
          meeting of the American Political Science Association on pre-law advising for 
          political scientists. Under the aegis of Freedoms Foundation of Valley 
          Forge, he has offered seminars on constitutional law topics for high 
          school and college teachers and works with the Union League of Philadelphia 
          on citizenship forums for high school students. Working with Dr. Bruce 
          Murphy of Lafayette College, Lee recently offered a one week prototype 
          of a Governor's School in Government and Public Service for students 
          in Chester County. He has served third terms as a Commonwealth Speaker 
          for the Pennsylvania Humanities Council, speaking on issues that include 
          judicial selection, the right of privacy as well as church-state matters.

Lee also is a member of the Liaison Advisory Board of the Washington 
          Center, the nation's largest provider of internships. Approximately, 
          fifteen students a year from Saint Joseph's participate in the internship, 
          working in a wide variety of placements ranging from the Departments 
          of State, Commerce, Justice, and Defense to the Supreme Court, the Senate 
          Finance Committee, and the embassies of several foreign nations.





iCommunity 
        Activities





Currently, 
          Dr. Lee chairs the Diocesan Appeals Board. The Board hears disputes 
          arising under the contracts between the Archdiocese of Philadelphia 
          and High School teachers in the system. At the national level, Lee is 
          a member of the First Friday Committee, an organization designed to 
          highlight issues of concern to Catholics and has written position papers 
          on ethnic and Catholic issues for national candidates. Lee was a member 
          of the Planning Commission of Haverford Township from 1998 to 2001. 
          He continues to serve as judge of elections in the township. Also, Lee 
          is a former member of the Board of Trustees of the Academy of Notre 
          Dame de Namur, having served as Chairman of both the Faculty & Education 
          and Planning Committees.








iIntroductory 
        Courses




POL 
        1011

iIntroduction 
      to American Government & Politics

view 
        syllabus




POL 
        1091

iIntroduction 
      to Political Science Research

view 
        syllabus



iPolitical 
      Theory



POL 
        2041
iiiiiiii(2045) 

iLegal 
      Theory 

view 
        syllabus





iAmerican Government and 
        Politics 




POL 
        2151

iConstitutional 
      Politics

view 
        syllabus




POL 
        2161

iConstitutional 
      Law: Civil Rights and Liberties

view 
        syllabus



iComparative 
      Politics



POL 
        2391

iCanadian 
      Government and Politics

view 
        syllabus



iSeminars




POL 
        2731

iSeminar 
      on Freedom of Religion

view 
        syllabus




POL 
        2801 iiiiiiii2811 

iWashington 
      Internship I-II

view 
        syllabus








 For 
        more information please contact:i

iDr. 
      Francis Graham Lee



 Office:i

iBarbelin 
      Hall, Room 105



Office 
        Hours: 


iMondays: 
        10-12 
iTuesdays: 
        2-3 
iWednesdays: 
        10-12, 2-3 
iFridays: 
        2-3




Phone:i

i(610) 
      660-1753 (1917)



e-mail:i

iglee@sju.edu







Return 
            to Political Science Home Page






Site 
            designed and developed by: Jane Frangiosa, Saint Joseph's University 
            Political Science Department Secretary.
jfrangio@sju.edu




Last 
          updated: August 2002









 
 

 





