


Psychology Courses at OBU



Courses




Page Contents:




General Psychology

Topics in Psychology


Developmental Psychology I


Developmental Psychology II


Statistics for Social Sciences


Biological Psychology


Educational Psychology


Psychology of Religion


History of Psychology


Experimental Psychology


Family Communication




Introduction to Counseling


Cognitive Psychology


Social Psychology


Theories of Personality


Advanced Topics in Psychology


Abnormal Psychology


Counseling Theory
	  and Practice


Practicum in Mental Health


Family Therapy Theory
	  and Practice


Independent Study in Psychology










PSY 122   General Psychology

    An overview of the field of psychology with emphasis on the personal and
    social relevance of theories, principles and research findings.  Included
    are the biological foundations of behavior, sensation and perception, learning
    and cognition, motivation and emotion, psychological development, personality
    and its assessment, the social bases of behavior, psychopathology and the
    therapeutic modification of behavior, and ecological psychology.

       Taught: Fall and Spring            By: Dr. Roark, Dr. Minars       Credit: 3 hrs Required for: Psychology & Family Psychology Majors & MinorsPrerequisites: None

Top of this pageSyllabus for this class   




PSY 199   Topics in Psychology

    A lower level course in a selected are of Psychology.  Not for independent
    study.

       Taught: On Demand            By: Dean Approved Professor       Credit: 3 hrs Required for: OptionalPrerequisites: Approval of the Dean

Top of this pageSyllabus for this class  



Psy 206    Developmental Psychology I

    An survey of theories and an examination of developmental processes from
    conception to adolescence with attention to the implications of research
    for child rearing and education.

       Taught: Fall only           By: Dr. Campbell       Credit: 3 hrs Required for: Psychology & Family Psychology Majors & MinorsPrerequisites: General Psychology





Top of this page
Syllabus for this class





Psy 208    Developmental Psychology II


    A continuation of Developmental Psychology I examining theory and research
    of life changes from adolescence through aging and senescence.

       Taught: Spring only           By: Dr. Campbell       Credit: 3 hrs Required for: Psychology & Family Psychology Majors & MinorsPrerequisites: General Psychology, Developmental Psychology I




Top of this page
Syllabus for this class







Psy 222    Statistics for the Behavioral and
    Social Sciences

    The application of statistical concepts to the analysis of research data
    in the behavioral and social sciences.  Both descriptive and inferential
    statistical procedures are covered, including factorial ANOVA.  While
    providing a conceptual understanding of the analysis techniques via their
    formulas, a greater emphasis is placed on the practical ability to select
    the appropriate statistical procedure for various types of data, perform
    analyses using statistical software packages, interpret the analyses and
    report the results in the APA format.

       Taught: Fall only           By: Dr. Roark       Credit: 3 hrs Required for: Psychology MajorsPrerequisites: College Algebra or equivalent
Top of this pageSyllabus for this class  




PSY 301   Biological Psychology

    An examination of the biological bases of behavior, including how the brain,
    nervous system, and endocrine system (hormones) regulate and/or influence
    the following behaviors: sensory processing, eating, sleeping, temperature
    control, sex, learning, memory, language, and abnormal behavior.

       Taught: Spring only           By: Dr. Roark       Credit: 3 hrs Required for: Psychology MajorsPrerequisites: General Psychology




Top of this page
Syllabus for this class







Psy 320   Educational Psychology  (EDUC
    320)

    Focus is on the development of students' thinking and reasoning skills, on
    research in studies of cognitive processes and on information processing.
     Attention will be given to learning theory and social learning and
    their applications to teaching strategies.

       Taught: Fall and Spring           By: Dr. Stricker       Credit: 2 hrs Required for: Education Majors and MinorsPrerequisites: Foundations of Educ; Sophomore status





Top of this page
Syllabus for this class







Psy 333    Psychology of Religion  (AMIN
    333)

    An application of psychological theory and research to the study of religious
    experience, expression and behavior, with special consideration to factors
    contributing to the process of Christian growth and the dynamics of Christian
    maturity.

       Taught: Spring, odd years only           By: Dr. Wilks       Credit: 3 hrs Required for: Applied Ministry MajorsPrerequisites: General Psychology




Top of this page
Syllabus for this class







Psy 354    History of Psychology

    The development of the major schools of psychology, their philosophic and
    scientific antecedents and their basic theoretical concepts, methodological
    characteristics, empirical content, and general adequacy.

       Taught: Spring only           By: Dr. Campbell       Credit: 3 hrs Required for: Psychology Majors and MinorsPrerequisites: General Psychology
Top of this pageSyllabus for this class



PSY 358   Experimental Psychology

    An introduction to experimental methodology in psychology, including
    non-experimental (observational, survey, archival, case-study) and experimental
    (single-factor, factorial) research designs.  The goals of this course
    are to enhance students' appreciation for the value of psychological research
    in their area of interest, and to provide them with the ability to 1) evaluate
    published research, 2) choose the appropriate methodology for a variety of
    research questions , 3) conduct valid research, and 4) present that research
    to others in accord with APA principles.  These goals are accomplished
    through regular classroom instruction, through supervised laboratory
    experimentation, and through the completion of an independent research project.

       Taught: Spring only           By: Dr. Roark       Credit: 3 hrs Required for: Psychology MajorsPrerequisites: General Psychology, Statistics




Top of this page
Syllabus for this class







Psy 365    Family Communication (CMAR
    365)

    A study of the communication processes within the family, the extent to which
    they affect and are affected by the interdependence of family members and
    the role they play in regulating family cohesion and adaptability and generating
    family images, themes, boundaries, and biosocial beliefs.

       Taught: Fall only           By: Dr. Hale       Credit: 3 hrs Required for: Family Psychology Majors and MinorsPrerequisites: Junior standing, or permission





Top of this page
Syllabus for this class







Psy 376    Introduction to Counseling
    (AMIN 376)

    An integrated approach to basic counseling skills, utilizing theory, practice
    and case application for use in para-professional settings with special emphasis
    on providing a foundation for the development of competencies in human relations
    needed in effective helping relationships.

       Taught: Fall and Spring           By: Dr. Jeske       Credit: 3 hrs Required for: Family Psychology Majors and MinorsPrerequisites: Junior standing and General Psychology




Top of this page
Syllabus for this class







Psy 380   Cognitive Psychology

    An exploration of the processes by which information is stored, modified,
    retrieved, and utilized.  Topics include perception, attention, learning,
    memory, knowledge representation, language, problem-solving, and decision
    making.

       Taught: Fall only           By: Dr. Roark       Credit: 3 hrs Required for: Psychology MajorsPrerequisites: General Psychology




Top of this page
Syllabus for this class







Psy 410   Social Psychology  (SASW
    410)

    Topics include the self, socialization, face-to-face encounters, groups,
    crowds, and social movements.  Application of psychological and sociological
    research to seek understanding of how one becomes a person, how values and
    attitudes operate, how conduct is influenced by social roles and environment,
    and how people act upon society to change it.

       Taught: Spring only           By: Dr. Dowdy       Credit: 3 hrs Required for: Psychology and Family Psychology MajorsPrerequisites: Intro to Sociology & General Psychology





Top of this page
Syllabus for this class







Psy 420    Theories of Personality

    An examination of the psychodynamics of personality from the vantage point
    of the major contemporary theories of personality.

       Taught: Fall only           By: Dr. Campbell       Credit: 3 hrs Required for: Psy Majors & Minors, Family Psy MajorsPrerequisites: Developmental Psychology II




Top of this page
Syllabus for this class







Psy 432    Advanced Topics in
    Psychology

    An advanced course in a selected area of Psychology.  Not for independent
    study.

       Taught: On Demand           By: Dean Approved Professor       Credit: 3 hrs Required for: OptionalPrerequisites: Junior standing and approval of the Dean
Top of this pageSyllabus for this class




Psy 472   Abnormal Psychology

    The dynamics of abnormal behavior and the diagnosis and treatment of psychogenic
    and physiogenic mental and emotional disorders.  Measures for the prevention
    of psychopathology.

       Taught: Fall only           By: Dr. Campbell       Credit: 3 hrs Required for: Psy Majors & Minors, Family Psy MajorsPrerequisites: Developmental Psychology II




Top of this page
Syllabus for this class







Psy 478    Counseling Theory and
    Practice

    A study of the major approaches to counseling, emphasizing their unique
    contributions and limitations, with the purpose of allowing each student
    to acquire a basis for a personalized theory and style on counseling that
    will incorporate the affective, cognitive, and behavioral dimensions of human
    experience, followed by an examination of the ethical issues in counseling
    as well as those relating to the counseling process and the personhood of
    the counselor.

       Taught: Spring only           By: Dr. Campbell       Credit: 3 hrs Required for: Family Psychology MajorsPrerequisites: Introduction to Counseling






Top of this page

Syllabus for this class







Psy 480    Practicum in Mental
    Health

    An opportunity for advanced psychology students to gain supervised experience
    working in off-campus clinical settings.  May be repeated up to six
    hours.

       Taught: On Demand           By: Dr. Jeske       Credit: 2 or 3 hrs Required for: OptionalPrerequisites: Junior status, Dev Psy II, & permission




Top of this page
Syllabus for this class







Psy 483    Family Therapy Theory and
    Practice

    An introduction to the major models of marriage and family relations,
    dysfunctions, and techniques of intervention.

       Taught: Fall only           By: Dr. Jeske       Credit: 3 hrs Required for: Family Psychology Majors and MinorsPrerequisites: Family Comm, and Intro to Counseling
Top of this pageSyllabus for this class  




Psy 499   Independent Study in Psychology

    Independent study for juniors and seniors with at least a B average in
    Psychology.

       Taught: On Demand           By: Dean Approved Professor       Credit: 3 hrs Required for: OptionalPrerequisites: Approval of the Dean




Top of this page
Syllabus for this class






[Home
Page][Department][Faculty][Courses][Degrees][Psi
Chi]
[Calendar][Newsletter][Links]

