

The World Lecture Hall


The World Lecture Hall

This page of UT Austin Web Central contains links to pages created by faculty
worldwide who are using the Web to deliver class materials.  For example, you
will find course syllabi, assignments, lecture notes, exams, class calendars,
multimedia textbooks, etc.  

Here's a form to add your
materials. To keep up with changes to the World Lecture Hall, check What's New regularly.  

Contents

Accounting
Agricultural Engineering
Anatomy
Anthropology
Archaeology
Architecture
Art and Art History
Astronomy
Biochemistry
Biology and Botany
Biomedical Engineering
Chemical Engineering
Chemistry
Civil Engineering
Communication
Computer Science
Cultural Studies
Economics
Education
Electrical and Computer Engineering
English and Technical Writing
Finance
Geology
Geography
History
Humanities
Journalism
Language
Library and Information Science
Management
Management Information Systems
Marketing
Mathematics
Medicine
Microbiology
Music
Neuroscience
Nuclear Engineering and Engineering Physics
Physics
Psychology
Political Science
Religious Studies
Sociology
Statistics
Virology


Accounting

Accounting Information Systems

Principles of systems analysis and design as related to accounting information
systems.  A basic discussion of the various methodologies for the development
of accounting information systems. Description of information systems and their
components.  Elements of PROLOG programming language and its use in systems
analysis and design.  Syllabus, calendar, lecture notes, assignments.  By
Jagdish S. Gangolly, State University of New York at Albany.


Advanced Accounting

Course information, readings, projects, lecture notes, exams, and resouces.  By
Glenn Owen, UC Santa Barbara. 


Cost Accounting

Contains syllabus, notes, and examples Accounting.  By Neil Fargher, University
of Oregon at Eugene.


Intermediate Accounting I

Course information, readings, projects, lecture notes, exams, and resouces.  By
Glenn Owen, UC Santa Barbara. 


Intermediate Accounting II

Course information, readings, projects, lecture notes, exams, and resouces.  By
Glenn Owen, UC Santa Barbara. 


Introduction to Management Accounting

Introduction to the concepts and practices underlying firms' internal
management accounting information systems.  The course emphasizes a user
perspective.  Syllabus, lecture notes, assignments, and links to related
materials.  By Joyce Berg, University of Iowa.


Introductory Management Accounting

Course notes, syllabus, assigments, tutorial groups, etc.  By Alan Sangster,
Aberdeen University.


Managerial Cost Accounting

Second course in managerial (or cost) accounting that uses activity-based
management as an organizing theme.  Focus is on supporting strategic decision
making, though financial reporting issues are covered.  Requires significant
group work, presentations, and written analyses of cases and issues.  Class
PowerPoint presentations, exams, and supplements available via FTP.  Syllabus,
calendar, lecture notes, assignments, exams, and links to related materials.
By Frank H.  Selto, University of Colorado at Boulder.


Seminar in Accounting Information Systems

Systems analysis and design as related to accounting information systems.
Systems Development Life Cycle.  Description of systems in terms of their
structure, function, behavior and data.  Use of Computer Aided Software
Engineering tools in design.  A very brief introduction to Object-Oriented
Systems Analysis and design.  Syllabus, calendar, lecture notes, and links to
related materials.  By Jagdish S. Gangolly, State University of New York at
Albany.


Agricultural Engineering

Soil and Water Conservation Management

Designed for seniors and graduate students in a science-based curriculum, this
course emphasizes analytical methods to plan how to utilize soil and water
resources in an environmentally responsible manner.  Calculus is not required.
Syllabus, calendar, lecture notes, assignments, and links to related materials.
By Larry F. Huggins, Purdue University.


Anatomy

Anatomy Teaching Modules

Currently contains the normal knee and the normal distal thigh.  By
Michael L. Richardson, University of Washington Department of
Radiology.


Human Anatomy

Course schedule, format, objectives, and other materials.  By various
faculty, Emory University.


Anthropology

Social Anthropology

Contains course abstract, exam schedules, and a weekly outline.  By
Jonathan M. Lizee, University of Connecticut.


Archaeology

GIS in Archaeology

Contains course syllabus, requirements, exam schedule, and list of
readings.  By Neel Smith, Bowdoin College.


Architecture

Building Systems I

Course syllabus, homework assignments, slides, and essays.  By Anthony
Webster, Columbia University. 


Digital Communities: Urban Planning and Design in Cyberspace

Schedule, assignments, lecture notes, student work, and links to related
materials.  By William J. Mitchell and Mitchell Kapor, Massachusetts Institute
of Technology. 


Enclosures and Environments I

Course syllabus.  By Anthony Webster and Jackie Welch, Columbia
University.


Introduction to Computer-Aided Design

An Introduction to 3-D CAD using Macintosh-based software, with emphasis on
rendering, digital image processing, and electronic publication on the Web.
Syllabus, assignments, student work, and links to related materials.  By Eden
Greig Muir & Rory O'Neill, Columbia University.


Introduction to the History, Theory and Design of Structures

Investigates basic structural behaviour, simple structures, and how an
understanding of basic structural behaviour can be utilized in architectural
design.  Syllabus, lecture notes, assignments.  By Chris H. Luebkeman and
Donald Peting, University of Oregon.



Renaissance and Baroque Architecture

The architecture of Italy in the 15th, 16th, and 17th centuries.  Loads
of excellent images from scanned slides taken by the instructor.  By
C.  W.  Westfall, University of Virginia.


The Text of the City

An analysis of space, form, and information in the city.  Syllabus, class
calendar, lecture notes, assignments, student work, and links to related
materials.  By Timothy Swischuk, Syracuse University.


Art and Art History

Art in the Age of Digital Dissemination

Class essays of students enrolled in a Fine Arts course taught at the
University of Victoria.


Commentary on Art

An introduction to writing about art.  Assignments, readings, and other
information.  By Jerrold Maddox, Penn State Univerity.


Mosaic and Art 211

Lots of screen shots and a thorough tutorial on using Mac Mosaic to
study art.  By Jay Lieske, Princeton University.


Visual Information in Art

Tutorial to demonstrate how visual information is used in art.  By
John H. Krantz, Hanover College.


Astronomy

Astronomy 1

Course syllabus, assignments and solutions, and a movie.  By Roger
Freedman, University of California at Santa Barbara.


Astronomy

A survey course in Astronomy for non-science majors.  Syllabus, class calendar,
assignments, and links to related materials.  By Dr Brian Monson, the
University of Tulsa.


Astronomy HyperText Animation Resource

Resource that attempts to animate several key concepts in astronomy.  Animation
is done in MPEG and there is sound narration.  Lecture notes.  By The Web,
University of Oregon.


Biochemistry

Medical Biochemistry

Currently contains a section on heme and iron.  By James Baggot,
Hahnemann University School of Medicine and Sharon E.  Dennis,
University of Utah.


Scatchard Plot (Interactive Simulation)

An interactive simulation of an important classical experiment in immunology.
Lecture notes and assignments.  By Charles Creutz, University of Toledo.


Biology and Botany

Botany

Collection of pointers to biology-related Web and Gopher servers.  By
Steve Wolf, California State University Stanislaus.


Cell Biology and Histology Laboratory Manual

Laboratory exercises and slides on the digestive tract, connective
tissue, muscles, the circulatory system, and more  From Emory University.


Principles of Protein Structure

It is multimedia, with several new technologies for communicating molecular
information and running a hypercourse.  Syllabus, lecture notes, assignments,
student work, and links to related materials.  Coordinated by Peter Murray-Rust
and Alan Mills, Globewide Network Academy and Birkbeck College, London, UK.


Taxonomy of Flowering Plants

Introduction to flowering plant systematics.  Information online includes base
course data, student information, exam keys, and a developing base of tutorials
for both lecture and laboratory.  Links are provided for access to plant
biodiversity data available on the Web.  The system carries an evolving suite
of Web pages representing experimental efforts to present information relevant
to course objectives.  By Hugh D. Wilson, Texas A&M; University.


Biomedical Engineering

Biomedical Engineering Applications

Course description, syllabus, and links to student projects that utilize links
to medical images and movies.  By Susan M. Blanchard, North Carolina State
University.


Chemical Engineering

Over a dozen classes

Links to over a dozen classes, including Elements of Chemical Engineering,
Reactor Dynamics and Design, and Process Design.  Course pages can list credits
and prerequisites and contain course outline, assignments, projects, problems,
and more.  By the Chemical Engineering Department, University of Florida.


Several classes

Links to several classes, including Computer Methods for Chemical
Engineers and Process Control.  Course pages can contain the course
syllabus, office hours, class notes, a clickable calendar of
assignment due dates, exam solutions, and more.  By Jeffrey Kantor,
University of Notre Dame.


Chemistry

Chemistry in Context

Introductory Chemistry for non-science majors, taught with a "constructivist"
flavor, as part of the Maryland Collaborative for Teacher Preparation.
Syllabus, calendar, assignments, exams,.  By T. C. O'Haver, U. of Maryland at
College Park.


General, Organic and Biochemistry

Freshman-level introduction to General, Organic and Biochemistry for Nursing
students.  Syllabus, chapter overviews and copies of the lecture slides.  By
James K. Hardy, The University of Akron.


Organic Chemistry Laboratory

Syllabus, policies, previous exams, and links to chemistry resources.  By
H. Mark Perks, University of Maryland, Baltimore County


Several classes

Resources for undergraduates studies of analytical, physical, and
organic chemistry.  Includes course syllabi, calendars, lecture notes,
and lab manuals.  By Brian Tissue and others, Virginia Polytechnic
Institute & State University, Blacksburg.


Civil Engineering

Engineering Hydrology

Introduction to hydrology.  Quantitative aspects of processes relating to
precipitation, runoff and groundwater flow are reviewed with simple
applications to water resource problems.  The emphasis is on the basic
scientific aspects, rather than on design.  Syllabus, calendar, assignments,
and links to related materials.  By Upmanu Lall, Utah State University.


Project Management and Economics

Students are acquainted with the principles of engineering economics and
construction management.  Syllabus, homework assignments, exams, and lecture
notes.   By Carl Haas, University of Texas at Austin.


Structural Engineering

Compilation of syllabi and homework assignments for undergraduate classes
related to structural engineering.  By Jack Kayser, Lafayette College.


Communication

Communication Technology and Society

Course syllabus.  By Aviva Rosenstein, University of Texas at Austin.


Computer-Mediated Communication

Study of the nature of computer-mediated communication, focusing on
its social aspects.  Includes links to course syllabus, online Internet
Web Text, and practicum lessons.  By Teresa Harrison, Rensselaer
Polytechnic Institute.


Computer Science

Accelerated Computer Science II

A laboratory-based accelerated introduction to Computer Science for students
with degrees in other disciplines.  Syllabus, calendar, lecture notes,
assignments, exams, student work, and links to related materials.  By Denbigh
Starkey and Ray Babcock, Montana State University.


Advanced Object Technology

Syllabus, readings, By Brad Cox, George Mason University.


Algorithms and Data Structures

Course overview, schedule, quizzes, assignments, and study guides.  By
Diana Moore, Washington University.


Computer Applications for the Liberal Arts

Course description, readings, pictures, programs, and other materials.
By Gerry Santoro, Pennsylvania State University.


Computer Graphics

Links to several computer graphics classes.  Materials can include
syllabus, grading policies, and assignments.  By various professors,
University of Calgary.


Computer Science: A Liberal Arts Approach

Syllabus, calendar, and assignments.  By Mary Beth Rosson and John A. N. Lee,
Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University.


Computer Systems Verification

Class policies, syllabus, assignments, lecture notes, and more.
By Phil Windley, Brigham Young University.


Computers, Ethics, and Society

Readings, class notes, links to related materials.  University of Pennsylvania.


Concepts of Programming Languages

Class policies, syllabus, assignments, lecture notes, and much more.
By Phil Windley and Paul Black, Brigham Young University.


CS Seminar

A 1-credit seminar course that all CS graduate students must take at least
once.  Weekly presentations by students, faculty, or outside speakers.
Syllabus, calendar, lecture notes, assignments, exams, student work.  By
Denbigh Starkey, Montana State University.


Digital Image Processing (DIP) with Khoros 2.0

Hands-on approach to Image Processing through an extensive number of
experiments.  Syllabus, outline, and more.  By Ramiro Jordán and Roberto
de Alencar Lotufo, University of New Mexico.


Ethics and Law on the Electronic Frontier

Syllabus, assignments, class notes, student work.  By Hal Abelson,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology.


Graphics and Scientific Visualization

A second, graduate-level, course in computer graphics taught in seminar format.
Syllabus, calendar, lecture notes, assignments, exams, student work, and links
to related materials.  By Denbigh Starkey and Ray Babcock, Montana State
University.  


Introduction to Computer Graphics

Introduces students to interactive 3-D computer graphics with OpenGL.  The
course concludes with an individual project.  Syllabus, calendar, lecture
notes, assignments, past exams, gallery of past projects, and links to other
materials.  By Michael D. McCool, University of Waterloo.


Introduction to Computers and Computing

Syllabus, grades, and other course materials, including the complete
text to Bruce Sterlings's The Hacker
Crackdown.  By Bill Dueber, Indiana University.


Introduction to FORTRAN for Engineers

Course description, objective, outline, and assignments.  By Dennis W. Butler,
California Polytechnic State University, San Luis Obispo.


Introduction to Object-Oriented Programming

Introductory information, example files, discussions of Makefiles, and
pointers to additional resources.  By Michael Chui, Indiana University.


Lisp programming (Common Lisp) for Artificial Intelligence

A 100-hour distance education introduction to this popular AI programming
language.  Registrants accepted from anywhere on the Internet.  Syllabus and
links to related materials.  By Marc Eisenstadt, The Open University, UK.


Macintosh Computer Applications

Course description, objective, and outline.  By Dennis W. Butler, California
Polytechnic State University, San Luis Obispo.

 
Mobile Computing and Intelligence

Introduction to mobile computing and the use of intelligent agents.  Syllabus,
calendar, lecture notes, assignments, student work, and links to related
materials.  By Anupam Joshi, Purdue University.


Operating Systems

A first course in operating systems for computer science majors.  Syllabus,
calendar, lecture notes, assignments.  By John H. Hine, Victoria University
of Wellington.


Operating Systems Organization

Course syllabus, assignments, lecture slides, and other handouts.  By
Douglas C. Schmidt, Washington University.


Proficient use of the World-Wide Web

Learn about the Web, servers, Perl, and server administration.  Syllabus,
lecture notes, and more.  By George Vanecek, Jr and Buster Dunsmore, Purdue
University.


Prolog programming for Artificial Intelligence

Syllabus and links to related materials.  "Intensive Prolog" is a 100-hour
distance education intro to this popular AI programming language.  Registrants
accepted from anywhere on the Internet.  By Marc Eisenstadt, The Open 
University, UK.   


Professionalism in Computing

Effects of computers on society.  Syllabus, calendar, assignments, and lecture
notes.  By John A. N. Lee, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University.


Software Engineering I

Course description, objective, outline, and assignments.  By Dennis W. Butler,
California Polytechnic State University, San Luis Obispo.

 
Software Engineering II

Course descriptions, objectives, outlines, and assignments.  By Dennis W.
Butler, California Polytechnic State University, San Luis Obispo.


Systems Analysis and Design

Course syllabus, schedule, and readings.  This course is taught primarily
via the Web.  Classroom attendance is required only for exams.  By Michael
Walters, University of Houston.


Translation of Computer Languages

Course overview, schedule, quizzes, and assignments.  By Laura
McCarthy, Washington University.


List of classes

List of all Computer Science classes, some with links to a course
syllabus.  Syllabus can include course description, grading policy,
assignments, and texts.  By various professors at Purdue University.


Several classes

Links to several classes, including Data Structures and Programming,
Computer Architecture, and Computer Graphics.  Course pages can
include class schedule, texts and readings, grades, policies,
projects, and lecture notes.  Some Class notes are
published separately.  By various professors, University of
California, Davis.


Over 25 classes

Course syllabi to over 25 classes.  A syllabus usually contains course
goals, prerequisites, readings, and a course outline of topics to be
covered.  From the University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill.


Various Courses

Links to several classes, including Great Ideas in Computer Science, Networks,
A Systems Approach, Advanced Computer Architecture,   By various
professors, Harvard University. 


Various classes

Links to several classes, including Introduction to Artificial
Intelligence, Computer Graphics, Introduction to Parallel Computer
Architecture, and Programming Languages.  Materials can include
syllabus, class notes and handouts, and assignments.  By various
professors, Carnegie Mellon University.


Various classes

Links of several classes, including C, X Windows, Image Processing,
and Computer Graphics.  Materials include searchable course notes,
program listings, and more.  By various professors, University of
Cardiff, Wales, UK.


Cultural Studies

Youth Music/Youth Culture

Includes course description, syllabus, bibliography, and links to related
materials.  By Thomas Swiss, English Department, Drake University.


Economics

Economic, Social, and Legal Environment

An applied microeconomics class that covers regulation, antitrust, and the law.
Syllabus, lecture notes, assignments.  By Luke Froeb, Owen School of
Managment, Vanderbilt.


Intermediate Macroeconomics

Understanding the global economy, with special emphasis on the impact of
international macroeconomic developments on financial markets and business.
Syllabus, calendar, lecture notes, assignments, exams, and links to related
materials.  By Stanley E. Zin, Carnegie Mellon University.


Introduction to Economic Analysis

Covers both microeconomics and macroeconomics.  The concentration is on
analysis.  Students are primarily in engineering, mathematics and computer
science.  Syllabus, lecture notes, and links to related materials.  By Dr.
Steven C. Myers, The University of Akron.


Introductory Econometrics

Develops tools for analyzing economic data and for estimating and properly
interpreting econometric models.  Interactive computer tutorials designed for
undergraduate econometrics help teach both the software pacakage and the
statistical methods.  By Christopher Ferrall, Queen's University.


Education

Educational Policy Advocacy

A doctoral course that satisfies a social foundations requirement for
educational administration majors.  Computer slideshows, assignments, grading
policies, course objectives, and schedules.  By Rodney P. Riegle, Illinois
State University.


Resources for Teaching

An undergraduate course introducing computer applications in the classroom.
Syllabus, calendar, lecture notes, assignments, and links to related materials.
By Thomas J. C. Smyth, University of South Carolina - Aiken.


Social Foundations of Education

An undergraduate course for teacher education majors.  Computer slideshows,
assignments, grading policies, course objectives, and schedules.  By Rodney P.
Riegle, Illinois State University.


Electrical and Computer Engineering

Digital Filters

Complete set of laboratory material and class problems.  By Len Bruton, The
University of Calgary.


Digital Logic Design

A sophomore-level introduction to digital logic design with an emphasis on
practical design techniques and circuit implementations.  Lecture notes,
assignments, and exams.  By Chris Taylor, Purdue University.


Practical Software Engineering

Covers the classic elements of a life cycle and techniques common in industry.
The top layers of the electronic course notes are used for presentation in
lectures.  The remainder is for exploration and review by students.  Lab
activities are coordinated through the Feedback area.  Syllabus, calendar,
lecture notes, assignments, and links to related materials.  By Werner B.
Joerg, University of Alberta.


English

American Literature: Crane through Present

This class is an experiment.  We will be reading various texts--poems, short
stories, novels, films--and trying to generate ideas from these texts.
Syllabus, calendar, and assignments.  By David Russell, University of Florida.


American Literature Survey

An American Literature Survey Site featuring interactive online texts, student 
discussions, analyses and projects.  Syllabus, calendar, student work, and
links to related materials.  By Daniel Anderson, University of Texas at
Austin.


Computer-Assisted Composition

Course syllabus, assignments, transcripts of online discussions, weekly class
summaries, and student work.  By Daniel Anderson and students, University of
Texas at Austin.


English Composition II

Emphasizes critical/logical thinking and reading, problem definition, research
strategies, and writing analytical, evaluative, and/or persuasive papers that
incorporate research.  Syllabus, calendar, and student work.  By Dr. Clark
Germann, Front Range Community College.


Introduction to Poetry

A handbook of terms for discussing poetry.  Covers figurative
language, rhythm and meter, and other topics.  By Harry Rusche and
students, Emory University. 


Shakespeare Illustrated

Illustrations and explanations of scenes from Shakespeare's plays.  By
Harry Rusche, Emory University.


Writing About Literature

Working both with hypertext and a MOO, students experiment develop their own
writing as models of literary texts.  Syllabus, calendar, assignments, student
work.  By Bill Ruegg, University of Florida.


Writing About Modern Technology

An introductory, college-level technical-writing course taught over the
Internet, using an online textbook, E-mail, and a LISTSERV classroom.
Syllabus, calendar, assignments, and links to related materials.  By David A.
McMurrey, Austin Community College.


Writing the Information Superhighway

Opportunity to explore and create the textual universe of cyberspace.
Syllabus, calendar, assignments, student work, and links to related materials.
By Wayne Butler, University of Michigan.


Writing through Media

Group self-portraits of education students.  Syllabus, assignments, student
work, and links to related materials.  By Gregory L. Ulmer, University of
Florida.


Finance

Basic Financial Management

An introduction to finance that focuses on basic paradigms, such as Net Present
Value, Capital Asset Pricing Theory, and Market Efficiency taught in the
context of valuation of risky assets.  Syllabus, assignments, exams, student
work, and links to related materials.  By Puneet Handa, University of Iowa.


Business Finance

Course syllabus, class schedule and handouts, sample data for
assignments, grade distribution, and pointers to various Web and
Internet guides.  By James Garven, University of Texas at Austin.



Business Finance

Course syllabus, class schedule and handouts, lecture notes,
assignments, grade distribution, and more.  By Richard MacMinn,
University of Texas at Austin.


Corporate Finance

The lectures are in portable document format (pdf) and are being linked
together.  Sample test questions and a formula sheet are also provided with
links to the lecture notes that are relevant.  Syllabus, lecture notes, exams, 
and links to related materials.  By Richard MacMinn, University of Texas at
Austin.


Financial Management (Principles of Finance)

Introductory course.  Syllabus, calendar, lecture notes, assignments, exams,
student work, and links to related materials.  By Dan Cooper, Marist College.


Investments Analysis

Introductory investments course.  Syllabus, calendar, lecture notes,
assignments, exams, student work, and links to related materials.  By Dr. Dan
Cooper, Marist Collge.


Uncertainty in Economics and Finance

This is a Ph. D. course that develops the notions of risk and risk aversion in
a financial market setting.  The topics covered include portfolio theory,
corporate risk management, corporate finance, principal/agent theory, and game
theory.  Syllabus, lecture notes, assignments, and links to related
materials.  By Richard MacMinn, University of Texas at Austin.


Geography

Geographer's Craft
 
An introduction to modern geographical research techniques.  General
information, course schedule, lecture and discussion notes, exercises, tip
sheets, a glossary, and pointer to various resources.  By Kenneth E. Foote
and staff, University of Texas at Austin.


Geology

Submarine Geology

Course syllabus, calendar, and reading assignments.  By William B. F.
Ryan and Walter C. Ptman III, Columbia University.


History

Augustine on the Internet

Study of Augustine of Hippo, conducted via the Internet only.
Contains a syllabus, Augustine's Confessions, and messages
from participants.  By James J. O'Donnell, University of Pennsylvania.


Electric Renaissance

Renaissance history taught via the Web.  Syllabus, class calendar, lecture
notes, assignments, and links to related materials.  Class discussion is run
from a listserver.  By E.L. Skip Knox, Boise State University.


The First Palaces in the Aegean

Study of appearance of Minoan palaces in Crete beginning around 2,000
B.C.  Bibliography included.  By Jeremy Rutter, Dartmouth College.


Humanities

Great Ideas

Course description, schedule, and pointers to related-readings.  By Steve
Krause, Bowling Green University.


Taming the Electronic Frontier

Technical and social issues of taming the electronic frontier.  Syllabus,
calendar, assignments, exams, grades, student work, and links to related
materials.  By Brad Cox, George Mason University.


Narrative Matters: Introduction to Narrative

Introduction to narrative in novels and film.  Links to texts ranging from
Beowulf to Neuromancer and films from Star Wars to Chinatown.  We trace the
narrative form of the "quest romance" from early medieval narratives to
Frankenstein and Blade Runner.  Many resources are contributed by students.
Syllabus, calendar, assignments, student work, and links to related materials.
By Martin Irvine, Georgetown University.


World Cultures to 1500

A survey of history, ideas, and cultures from antiquity to the Italian
Renaissance.  Extensive archive of texts and articles used in the course along
with student work.  By Richard Hooker, Washington State University.


Journalism

Feature Writing
 
Course syllabus, class schedule, course requirements and other information.  By
James Tankard, UT Austin.


Writing for the Mass Media
 
Course syllabus, class schedule, course requirements and other information.  By
James Tankard, UT Austin.


Language

Hwaet! Old English in Context

Learn basic Old English by reading short passages from the Old English Corpus,
with links to sound and images and an audio-visual glossary.  Links to related
materials.  By Catherine N. Ball, Georgetown University.


Introduction to Medieval Latin

Introduction to the Latin language and literature, c. 350 - c.1500.  Course
involves a Web computing component and student experience in using Internet
resources.  Extensive Web resources are provided, with links to many of the
resources in the Labyrinth project, a Web server for medieval studies, of which
the professor is co-director.  Syllabus, calendar, assignments, student work,
and links to related materials.  By Martin Irvine, Georgetown University.


Let's Learn Arabic

A map of the Middle East and ten audio lessons for learning Modern
Standard Arabic.  For the serious student only, since the audio files
are very large.  By Roger Allen and Adel Allouche, University of
Pennsylvania.  Part of  The
Virtual Language Lab.


The French Page

Over 60 slides of French history and civilization with clickable audio
captions.  By Michelle Caroly-Alter, University of Pennsylvania.  Part
of  The Virtual Language
Lab.


Hindi Program at Penn

Slides of Northern India with clickable audio captions.  By Surendra
Gambhir and Swagata Altekar, University of Pennsylvania.  Part of  The Virtual Language Lab.


Serbian Language Lab

Learn and hear the Serbian alphabet and simple phrases in Serbian.
From the University of Maryland.


Travelers' Japanese

Hear and learn basic pronunciation and phrases for travelers in Japan.
Phrases cover, asking directions, eating in restaurants, and other
essential expressions.  By TAKADA Toshihiro, Nippon Telegraph and
Telephone.


Library and Information Science

Introduction to Internet Resources and Services

Introduces students to networked options for information, research, and
communication.  Course syllabus, readings, guides and handouts.  By Mary Moore
and Mary Lynn Rice-Lively, University of Texas at Austin.


The Making of Digital Libraries

Understanding the nature of digital libraries.  Syllabus, course essays, and
links to related materials.  By David L. Rodgers, University of Michigan.


Mathematics

Several classes

Links to several classes, including Advanced Engineering Mathematics
and Introduction to Numerical Analysis I.  Course pages can contain
a syllabus, topic outline, projects, and information on tools to be
used in class.  By various professors, Clemson University.


Management

Economics of the Firm

Syllabus, lecture notes, and assignments.  By Luke Froeb, Vanderbilt
University.


Management Information Systems

Business Data Communications

Business data communications for non-technical majors.  Covers basic technical
concepts, understandings of the strategic use of telecommunication in business,
and a review of managerial issues surrounding the development and operation of
such facilities.  Syllabus, calendar, lecture notes, assignments, grades,
student work, and links to related materials.  By Anthony A.  Verstraete, Penn
State University.


Business Information Systems

Sophmore-level introduction to basic information systems concepts.  No computer
lab.  Syllabus, calendar, lecture notes, assignments, exams, grades, and links
to related materials.  By Anthony A. Verstraete, Penn State.


Commerce on the Web

A hands-on course in which students work in groups exploring the way businesses
and communities interact on the Web, propose a design for a local commerce Web,
and begin to execute this design.  Syllabus, assignments, and links to related
materials.  By Joyce Berg and Puneet Handa, University of Iowa.


Electronic Commerce

Introduction to electronic commerce and the emerging global information
highway.  Syllabus, calendar, lecture notes, assignments, student work, and
links to related materials.  By Blake Ives, Southern Methodist Univeristy.


Impact of New Information Resources: Multimedia and Networks

Social impact of technology.  Syllabus, assignments, student work, and links to
related materials.  By Howard Bresser, University of California, Berkeley.


The Information Society

Gives students in the Arts and Humanities an understanding of the issues which
arise from the use of information technology.  Syllabus, calendar, lecture
notes, assignments, exams, and links to related materials.  By Ewan Sutherland,
University of Wales, Lampeter.


Introduction to Management Information Systems

Junior- and senior-level introduction to basic management information systems
concepts.  Syllabus, calendar, lecture notes, assignments, exams, grades, and
links to related materials.  By Anthony A.  Verstraete, Penn State University.


Leveraging the Information Superhighway--A Business Perspective

Syllabus, assignments, readings, and lecture notes.  By Stephen Ruth, George
Mason University.


Management Information Systems

Lecture notes, assignments, exams (after the students take them), and
supplemental readings for a course that investigates the interaction of
information technology and management.  By Brian Butler
(bb26@andrew.cmu.edu), Carnegie Mellon University.


Management of Information Technology

Course syllabus, overview, and assignments.  By Blake Ives, Southern Methodist
University.


Riding the Information Superhighway

Introduction to the Information Superhighway.  Students learn all of the
Internet tools, with an emphasis on their access through a graphical browser
and through a UNIX shell.  The Internet then becomes a tool used to research
the technological, social, and business implications of the Superhighway.
Syllabus, calendar, lecture notes, assignments.  By Dr. David Jankowski,
California State University, San Marcos.


Strategic Information Systems Management

Provides students with a computing background with an executive perspective on
the strategic management of IS in an organisation.  It does not address the
internal management of the IS function.  Syllabus, calendar, assignments.  By
David Algeo, The University of Dublin, Trinity College.


Systems Analysis and Design

Introduction to the principles of information systems development, with an
emphasis on management's role in the development process.  For business
management majors interested in MIS.  Emphasis is placed on the initial stages
of the systems development life cycle.  Web development (using HTML) is used to
give the students a taste for the development process.  Syllabus, calendar,
lecture notes, assignments, exams.  By David Jankowski, California State
University, San Marcos.


Systems Design and Implementation

A second-semester, undergraduate course focusing on the design and
implementation of responsive and long lasting software.  Syllabus, calendar,
lecture notes, assignments, exams, and student work.  By James C.  Brancheau,
University of Colorado at Boulder.


Teaching MIS with Cases

Information about the development, availability, and use of business cases for
teaching MIS.  By Sid L. Huff, University of Western Ontario.


Telecommunications

Syllabus, calendar, assignments, grades, student work, and links to related
materials.  By Rassule Hadidi, Sangamon State University.


Various Case Studies

Case studies on innovation and project management, commerce on the Web, and
other topics.  By various professors, Southern Methodist University.


Marketing

New Product and Service Development in Marketing

Course syllabus, overview, assignments, calendar, etc.  By Donna L.
Hoffman, Vanderbilt University.


Marketing Research

Course syllabus, overview, outline, readings, etc.  By Thomas P. Novak,
Vanderbilt University.


Seminar on Marketing in Computer-Mediated Environments

Course topics, assignments, and readings.  By Thomas P. Novak, Vanderbilt
University.


Medicine

Multimedia Textbooks

Several multimedia medical textbooks on topics such as pediatric
airway disease, lung anatomy, pulmonary embolus, and diffuse lung
disease.  These textbooks are part of The Virtual
Hospital, a project of the University of Iowa College of Medicine,
Department of Radiology.


Miscellaneous Teaching Files

Currently contains an exhibit on fractal analysis of trabecular bone.
By Michael L. Richardson and others, University of Washington Department of
Radiology.


Microbiology

Fundamentals of Microbiology

Introductory course with laboratory in microbiology for sophomore-junior level
students.  Syllabus, calendar, lecture notes, interactive practice exams, and
links to related materials.  By Thomas M.  Terry, The University of
Connecticut.


Microbiology

Download several charts (Microsoft Word 5.1) that present basic information
about various bacteria, viruses, fungi, and parasites covered in the Medical
Microbiology course at Tulane University School of Medicine.  By Ken Bookstein
(medical student), Tulane University School of Medicine.


Music

Computer Music

Basic course information, pointers to Web sites of interest to
students of computer music, and sound and graphics files pertinent to
the course.  By Brian Evans, Vanderbilt University.


Jazz Improvisation

Course description, articles, and pointers to related readings.  By Joan
Wildman, the University of Wisconsin-Madison.


Music in World Cultures

Contains syllabi, study guides, listening quizzes, and links to other Net
resources.  By John Murphy, Western Illinois University.


Women in Music

Study of lives and work of women composers and of women's involvement in other
aspects of musical creativity in classical, jazz, pop, and folk music.
Syllabus, and links to related materials.  By Linda Burian Plaut, Virginia
Tech.


Neuroscience

Neuroscience

Access to a set of JPEG images that help medical students learn the
cross-sectional anatomy of the human brain stem.  By Ken Bookstein (medical
student), Tulane University School of Medicine.


Nuclear Engineering and Engineering Physics

Engineering Problem Solving I

Link to course materials.  By Jake Blanchard, University of Wisconsin.


Physics

Alternative Energies

Physics of energy generation via Alternative Energy Sources. Syllabus,
calendar, lecture notes, assignments, exams, student work, and links
to related materials.  By Greg Bothun, University of Oregon.


Electricity and Magnetism

A calculus-level E&M class for scientists and engineers.  Syllabus,
calendar, and exams.  By David Kagan, California State University, Chico.


FORTRAN Programming for Physics and Astronomy

An independent-study reading course consisting of a series of exercises
designed to teach the student FORTRAN programming for scientific use, while
also introducing UNIX, EMACS, RCS and computer graphics.  Syllabus,
assignments, and links to related materials.  By Eric Myers, Vassar College.


Honors Introductory Physics: Electricity and Magnetism

Honors section of introductory physics for Physical Science and Engineering
Majors II.  Covers electricity and magnetism.  Syllabus, calendar, assignments,
exams, grades, and links to related materials.  By Maurice Barnhill, University
of Delaware.


Several classes

Syllabi, exams, homework, and lecture notes for several classes, including
Physics of Energy and the Environment, The Scientific Basis for the Man-Nature
Partnerhip, and General Physics.  By various professors, University of Oregon.


Several classes

Links to several classes.  Course pages can contain assignments, quizzes,
a database of several years' worth of old exams, and more.  By various
professors, University of Pennsylvania.


Several classes

Links to several undergraduate and graduate classes, including Science
for Survival, Electromagnetism, and Computational Physics.  Course
pages can contain syllabus, lecture notes, and assignments.  By various
professors, Carleton University.


Modern Physics

Introduction to relativity, cosmology, particle physics, and other topics.  By
four student teams led by David Weaver, Chandler-Gilbert Community College.


Physics Homework Service

Course syllabi, first-day handouts, and instructions for using computerized
homework service for various physics courses.  Can also submit
homework and check grades.  By various professors, University of Texas
at Austin.  


Political Science

American Politics

Basic introduction to American political institutions and culture.  Syllabus,
readings, course assignments, lecture notes, and pointers to related materials.
Includes series of assignments requiring use of the Web.  By Steven M.
Schneider, SUNY Institute of Technology at Utica/Rome.


Politics of International Oil

Analyzes the national and international structures of the petroleum industry.
Changing trends in industrial structures are related to international political
alignments, focusing on the Middle East.  Materials include world oil data and
mail archives about oil producing countries.  Syllabus, calendar, assignments,
and links to related materials.  By Clement M. Henry, University of Texas at
Austin.


Virtual Seminar in Global Political Economy

The Virtual Seminar in GPE is offered over the Internet and facilitated by Dr.
Gonick in collaboration with 24 other faculty members around the world.
Students can enroll online.  Faculty who want to "sit-in" can also enroll
online.  Syllabus, calendar, assignments, student work, and links to related
materials.  By Lev S.  Gonick, Arizona State University West and University of
Guelph.


Psychology

Sensation and Perception Tutorials

Learn the fundamentals of sensory processes, used in several classes
in psychology.  By John H. Krantz, Hanover College.


Religious Studies

The Bible: Wisdom, Poetry and Apocalyptic

Study of the Ketuvim, the third division of the Tanakh.  Syllabus, class
calendar, and links to related materials.  By Tzvee Zahavy, University of
Minnesota.


Foundations of Theology

Course description, syllabus, exam, and pointers to various
resources.  By Kern R Trembath and Jeffrey VanderWilt, University of
Notre Dame.


Introduction to Judaism

Course description, syllabus, readings, and pointers to various
resources for Judaic studies.  By Bruce Rosenstock, University of
California, Davis.


Sociology

Sociology of Cyberspace

Examines the contemporary revolution in human interaction via computer.
Syllabus, calendar, assignments, student work, and links to related materials.
By Leonardo Salamini, Bradley University.


Statistics

Graphical Data Analysis

Discusses how to use graphical techniques to find patterns in data and present
results to others.  The course explores topics ranging from human visual
perception and computer vision to conditional expectation and empirical
distributions. There is a special off-campus page to help Internet visitors get
started.  Syllabus, calendar, lecture notes, assignments, and links to related
materials.  By Jeff Banfield, Montana State University.


Virology

Various Virology Courses

Tutorials, course notes, educational materials, animations, interactive models,
and color images of viruses.  By Stephan Spencer and others, University of
Wisconsin-Madison.


Zoology

Conservation Biology

Students will emerge with training in practical aspects of ecology, b