









Cultures of Asia (Jones, 1996)








[About]
[Index]
[Search]
[Other Links]
[Comments/Submissions]



Cultures of Asia
Anthropology 255.001 
T R 12:00-1: 15 P.M. (3) HP 1030
Marjorie Melvin Jones
Sociology/Foreign Languages Depts. SC 166
Office Hours: MWF 10:00-11:30 A.M.; TR 1:00-2:00 P.M.; By
Appointment
Phones: 812-464- 1931 (office); 812-867-6890 (home)
COURSE GOALS:
This course is designed to acquaint students
with the land, peoples, and cultures of Eastern Asia-from Burma
to the Philippines and from inner Asia to the Indonesian
archipelago--as anthropologists have described them. The focus of
the course is on comparing and contrasting four major culture
areas--China, Japan, Mongolia and Tibet, and Southeast Asia with
the emphasis on Vietnam.
COURSE REQUIREMENTS:
ASSIGNED READING; TESTS,; ATTENDANCE; GRADES
To that end students must read five articles from the optional
text which will be put on reserve and three short ethnographies.
There will be four, non-cumulative exams which will include a
variety of questions, including essays and map exercises. Every
student should have access to a good atlas or maps of Asia to
supplement the maps provided as handouts. Students will also be
provided with study guides for the ethnographies to aid in
focused reading in preparation for exams. Each exam will count
20% of the total grade and will be worth 100 points. The grading
scale is 90-100=A; 80-89=B; 70-79=C; 60-69=D. You final grade
will be based on the average of all your grades. I will take
attendance and attendance will be factored into final decision
about grades. 
PROJECT 
The other 20% of the grade will come from a research project on
Vietnam. Students may choose to do research with others in the
class or the student may work alone on an aspect of the culture
of Vietnam. This research may include any or all of the
following: library research in books and journals, internet/WWWeb
information, museum visits, museum exhibits, interviews with
knowledgeable people, visits to Vietnamese establishments and
businesses, movies, records, and videos. The group or individual
will present their research to the class in a 15 or 20 minute
oral presentation. The presentation must include a complete
bibliography and a short summary of the student(s)'s research to
give to the teacher and the other students in the class. I will
grade the presentation, summary, and bibliography and critique it
in written form. You must do your presentation when
scheduled unless you have arranged to change the date ahead of
time. If you do not, you will receive a zero on the project.
Should the class have more than 15 students,
students will have two other options. Instead of an oral
presentation students may: l)writing a short research paper or 2)
doing an interview with a person from Vietnam. Instructions for
these options will be given students later.
REQUIRED TEXTS:
1. Feiler, Bruce S. 1991 Learning to Bow:
Inside the Heart of Japan. Tickenor and Fields: New York.
2. Chance, Norman 1991 China's Urban Villagers: Changing Life
in a Beijing Suburb. Holt, Rinehart, and Winston: Ft. Worth.
3. Goldstein, Melvyn and Cynthia Beall 1994 The Changing World
of Mongolia's Nomads. University of California Press:
Berkeley.
OPTIONAL TEXT:
4. Evans, Grant, ed. 1993 Asia's Cultural
Mosaic: An Anthropological Introduction. Prentice-Hall: New
York.
Five chapters from this text are on reserve in the library. They
are required reading. You may read them there or you may buy the
book.
ASSIGNMENTS: You should have read
the assignments before coming to class. The dates for all tests
except for the final are tentative and may be changed to suit the
teacher and students. You must take the final when it is
scheduled. The film and video schedule is equally tentative. 
1. Tues., Aug. 27 
No reading assignment Lecture: Introduction to anthropology, the
concept of culture, the way anthropologists work, the idea of
Asia, and the work of anthropologists in Asia.
2. Thurs., Aug. 29 
Read: Evans, Chpt. I on reserve in library; Feiler, Chpts. I
& 2
Lecture: Geography of Japan, its people, and languages
3. Tues., Sept. 3 
Read: Evans, Chpt. 14 on reserve in the library; Feiler Chpts. 3
& 4 Film: "The Electronic Tribe" Lecture: Japanese
language, writing system, literacy, and early literature.
4. Thurs., Sept. 5 
Read: Feiler, Chpts. 5,6,7, &8
Lecture: Japanese history
5. Tues., Sept. 10 
Read: Feiler, Chpts. 9,10,11, & 12 Video: "The Family
Game" I will not be in class; I have to go to Indianapolis
for a meeting; but you are responsible for viewing the video and
the material in it.
6. Thurs., Sept. 12 
Read: Feiler, Chpts. 13, 14, 15, & 16
Lecture: Making a living and class structure
7. Tues., Sept. 17
Read: Feiler, Chpts. 17, 18, 19, & 20
Lecture: Family life, socialization, and education
8. Thurs., Sept. I 9
Read: Feiler, Chpts. 21, 22, & 23
Lecture: World view and religion
9. Tues., Sept. 24
Read: Feiler, Chpts. 24 & the Epilogue
Slides: Japanese art and architecture
Lecture: Japanese aesthetics
10. Thurs., Sept. 26
FIRST EXAM
11. Tues., Oct. I
Read: Chance, Forward, Preface, & Introduction
Lecture: The geography and peoples of China
12. Thurs., Oct. 3
Read: Chance, Chpt. l, 2, & 3
Film: to be announced
Lecture: Chinese Languages, writing system, and brief history up
to 1949
13. Tues., Oct. 8
Read: Chance, Chpt. 4 Lecture: Why Communism? Its appeal:
China from 1949 to now.
14. Thurs., Oct. 10
Read: Chance Chpt. 5
Lecture: Peasant life in Guangdong province; making a living
15. Tues., Oct. 15
Read: Chance, Chpt. 6
Lecture: Peasant Life in Guangdong province; marriage, family,
and religion
16. Thurs., Oct. 17
Read: Chance, Chpts. 7 & 8
Lecture: Urban life in south China
17. Tues., Oct. 22
Read: Chance, Chpt. 9
Introduction to modern film in China:
Film: "The Story of Qiu Ju"
18. Thurs., Oct. 24
Film: "The Story of Qiu Ju" ?
Discussion of film
19. Tues., Oct. 29
SECOND EXAM
20. Thurs., Oct. 31
Read: Goldstein and Beall,. Preface, Introduction & Chpt.
1
Lecture: Geography, people, and languages of inner Asia
21. Tues., Nov. 5
Read: Goldstein and Beall, Chpts. 2 & 3
Film: "Mongolia"
Lecture: The pastoral way of life: comparison with Tibet
22. Thurs., Nov. 7
Read: Goldstein & Beall, Chpts. 4 & 5
Lecture: The culture of Tibet
23. Tues., Nov. 12
ASSESSMENT DAY--NO CLASSES
Read: Goldstein & Beall, Chpt.s 6 & 7
24. Thurs., Nov. 14
Read: Goldstein & Beall, Chpts. 8 & 9 &
Conclusions
Student Presentations
25. Tues., Nov. 19
THIRD EXAM
26. Thurs., Nov. 21
Lecture: Introduction to Southeast Asia: geography, people,
and languages
Student Presentations
27. Tues., Nov. 26
Read: Evans, Chpt. 3, on reserve in library
Student Presentations
28. Thurs., Nov, 28
THANKSGIVING
29. Tues., Dec. 3
Read: Evans, Chpt. 12, on reserve in library
Student Presentations
30. Thurs., Dec. 5
Read: Evans, Chpt. 15, on reserve in library
Student Presentations
31. Thurs., Dec. 12 
FINAL EXAM: 12:00 noon-2:00 P.M.
EXPLANATION OF A255 "CULTURES OF
ASIA" SYLLABUS 
by Marjorie Jones Aug., 1996
This course serves the following
constituencies.
1. Students may take this course to meet their University Core
Curriculum[General Education] requirement for one 3-hour class in
"Global Communities". 
2. Sociology students may count two anthropology courses towards
their major requirements in sociology. This course would count
for a B.A. in Sociology. 
3. Although we offer neither a major or a minor in anthropology,
a number of students elect to take all the courses offered in a
four-year sequence to get a concentration of 18-24 hours of
anthropology classes. These students take A255. 
4. Students with an interest in Asia, including those
non-degree-seeking students from the community, who take the
course when it is offered at night. These often include students
interested in the martial arts or Asian religions.
The University of Southern Indiana is a
four-year,state university with between 7-8,000 students. It has
been growing in enrollments every year and is hard-pressed to
keep up Classroom and office space are at a premium. The school
runs from 7:30 A.M. to 10:00 P.M. at night and on Saturday. We
are on the semester system and have three summer sessions. We
have some graduate programs. We are an open-admissions university
with a student body that includes many non-traditional students.
.Most of our students work and many have heavy family
responsibilities, as well. Since money is tight for many of our
students, teachers have to be careful not to ask them to buy too
many books. Time is also scarce and teachers have to be realistic
in their expectations of what students will do outside class.
A SHORT, ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY OF SELECTED
WORKS FROM THE ANTHROPOLOGICAL TREASURE ON ASIA
The following list contains books that could be
used by teachers of undergraduate courses, either as sources for
the teacher or texts for students. I chose works in English for
non-specialists in the field that are general introductions to a
whole country or works that are representative of major ethnic
groups or community studies that are typical in some way of the
larger country. I left out studies of small, disappearing, or
non-representative groups like those on the Ainu of Japan or the
hunting and gathering societies of Malaysia or the Philippines
even though these are often of interest to anthropologists for
theoretical reasons. (For example, the Semai of Malaysia are of
interest to scientists whose research explores the possibility of
a society in which there is no expression of violence.)
Given the rapid pace of change in many parts of
Asia, I concentrated on books reporting recent research. The
focus of the course "Cultures of Asia" is contemporary
peoples and cultures. For that reason some of the classic works
in anthropology are left out--classics like: I ) Margaret Mead
and Gregory Bateson's photographic essay, Balinese Character,
based on field work done in the 1930ties and published in 1942;
2) Ruth Benedict's The Chrysanthemum and the Sword, based
on research on Japanese character for the Defense Department and
published at the end of World War II; 3) Martin Yang's famous
study, A Chinese Village: Taitou, Shantung Province,
published in 1945; 4) the social anthropologist Edmund Leach's
study, done behind Japanese lines during World War II, published
in 1954 as Political Systems of Highland Burma: A Study of
Kachin Social Structure; 5) Clifford and Hildred Geertz'
field work in Java and Bali in the 1950ties, reflected in
Clifford Geertz' Peddlars and Princes (1963) or their
joint work, Kinship in Bali (1975); 6) Ronald Dore's
research in urban Japan in the 1950ties in City Life in Japan:
a Study of a Tokyo Ward (1958) and rural life in Shinohata
(1973); 7) Norma Diamond's K'un Shen: a Taiwan Village.
Concentrating on recent publications based on
research done in the last 15 years, presents a problem, however.
Authoritarian regimes, warfare, hostility to non-communist or
foreign researchers in general, or hostility to the whole
enterprise of social science research on the grounds that such
research does not serve state purposes (isn't "useful")
and serves colonial/ imperial purposes have closed whole
countries to anthropologists for many years. For example research
has been difficult or impossible in Myanmar, North Korea, and
Vietnam and until recently also in Laos, Cambodia, China, Tibet,
and Mongolia. To give an example, the only community studies done
by anthropologists in Vietnam date to the Vietnam war. Gerald
Cannon Hickey's monograph on a Mekong River delta peasant
community, Village in Vietnam, was published in 1964 and
his recent publications on the hill tribes of Vietnam are
historical treatments. In other words, for some part.s of Asia,
there no, or very few, good quality anthropological studies
accessible to undergraduate students or their teachers.
The following list consists of a small; number
of books and monograph.s that would be excellent sources for
teachers or possible text.s for undergraduate students. The
asterisk (*) indicates those that might be suitable texts.
I. JAPAN:
A. General Introductions:
1. Befu, Harumi 1971 Japan: an
Anthropological Introduction. Chandler; San Francisco.
* I used this as a general introduction to Japan until it went
out of print. It's still available in many libraries. The
chapters on history, culture and personality, art style are
especially useful. He is a well-known Japanese anthropologist
married to an American. He has published many articles and other
books.
2. Hendry, Joy 1995 Understanding Japanese
Society. 2nd ed. Routledge: London.
* Joy Hendry is a social anthropologist who has published
extensively on many aspects Japanese life. This work includes
chapters on all aspects of culture, including history and popular
culture, as well as the usual sections on work, family, and
community, etc. A very useful features of this book is that she
cites her references at the end of each chapter with suggestions
for further reading, including novels and other "light
reading".
3. Lebra, Takie Sugiyama 1976 Japanese
Patterns of Behavior. University of Hawaii Press: Honolulu.
* The book arise from Lebra's attempts to teach students
something about the culture of Japan and Japanese behavior at the
University of Hawaii. Her focus is primarily on "Ethos"
or world view and values. She includes chapters of deviance and
the Yakuza. suicide, and treatment of deviant behavior,
topics not covered well in the other books cited.
4. Hendry, Joy and Jonathan Webber 1986 Interpreting
Japanese Society: Anthropological Approaches. JASO Occasional
Papers #5: Oxford. This monograph contains articles on
contemporary Japanese world view, religion, and leisure-time
activities.
B. Specific Subjects:
5. Imamura, Anne. 1987 Urban Japanese
Housewives: At Home and in the Community University of Hawaii
Press: Honolulu. 
*Anne Imamura is an American sociologist, whose husband is
Japanese. She studied the lives of middle-class women in a Tokyo
suburb in 1977-78.
6. Hendry, Joy 1981 Marriage in Changing
Japan: Community and Society St. Martin's Press: New York.
7. Hendry, Joy 1986 Becoming Japanese: The
World of the Preschool Child. Manchester University Press:
Manchester 
*While the topic is education and socialization, it is a great
source for those interested in the Japanese world view as well.
8. Bestor, Thomas 1983 Japan's High Schools.
University of California Press: Berkeley. This is another famous
anthropological study of Japanese education from the perspective
of high schools.
9. Feiler, Bruce S. 1991 Learning to Bow:
Inside the Heart of Japan. Tickenor & Fields: New York.
* Feiler is a Japanese-speaking teacher of English who spend a
year in a junior high school in Tochigi Prefecture in the town of
Sano north of Tokyo in the Middle of Honshu. In the course of
reading about his experience, the intense "groupism" of
Japanese culture is clear including the tragedies of those who
don't fit in (returnees from abroad and the Burakumin/Eta or
outcastes).
C. Community Studies:
10. Norbeck, Edward 1984 Changing Japan.
2nd ed. Waveland Press: Prospect heights, Ill.
* Waveland Press publishes many good paperback ethnographies
written specifically for undergraduates. Many are reissues of
classic works from the 1960ties and 70ties, Some have been
updated by the anthropologists and some have not. This book
follows a family's fortunes from the rural south as the younger
generation gets an education and one becomes a
"salaryman" in Tokyo. However, Japanese who read it
tell me that it is out of date. Norbeck began his research 30
years ago.
11. Bestor, T.C. 1986 Neighborhood Tokyo.
Stanford University Press: Stanford, Cal.
I have not seen this work, but it's often cited by other
anthropologists.
II. CHINA
A. Regional Studies:
1. Parish, William L. And martin King Whyte
1978 Village and Family in Contemporary China. University
of Chicago Press: Chicago. 
China was closed to western sociological and anthropological
research in the 70ties, for the most part, so Parish and Whyte
studied peasant life and later urban life in Guangdong Province
by systematic interviewing of recently arrived peasants, first,
and later, urban immigrants to Hong Kong. The books are a useful
starting point for teachers, even though they are a little
out-of-date.
2. Whyte, Martin K. And William L. Parish 1984 Urban
Life In China. University of Chicago Press: Chicago.
B. Community Studies:
3. Chance, Norman 1991 China's Urban
Villagers: Changing Life in a Beijing Suburb. 2nd ed. Holt,
* Rinehart, and Winston: Ft. Worth. Fred Engst, born of American
parents in China, grew up in China and was a research
collaborator with Chance. Engst experienced the Tiananmen Square
massacre and its aftermath. The focus of the book is on peasant
life and the changes this commune has undergone since 1949.
4. Huang, Shiu-min 1989 The Spiral Road:
Change in a Chinese Village through the Eves of a Communist
* Party Leader. Westrow Press: Boulder. The
anthropologist studied in the coastal areas of Guangdong and
Fujian provinces. He describes the changes in one area through
the words of a party leader, a technique anthropologist call the
life-history method.
5. Hinton, William 1983 Shenfan: Continuing
Revolution in a Chinese Village. Random House: New York.
Hinton is also the author of the classic Fanshen: A
Documentary of Revolutionary Change in a Chinese Village.
(Vintage Books: New York)
III. INNER ASIA: MONGOLIA AND TIBET
1. Goldstein, Melvyn c. And Cynthia M. Beall
1990 Nomads of Western Tibet: the Survival of a Way of Life.
University of California Press: Berkeley.
2. 1994 The Changing World of Mongolia's
Nomads. University of Cal Press: Berkeley.
* Goldstein and Beall studied both Tibetan and Mongolian pastoral
nomads. Their research in Tibet in 1988 and in Mongolia in 1990
was conducted by the method of participant observation. They
actually lived with the nomads. Their research in Mongolia
spanned the change from Marxist collectives under a regime with
strong ties to Russia to a market economy in an independent
state. These books are unusual in modern anthropology. Not
only are they written for a general audience, the authors
provide a visual ethnography in the beautiful color photographs
which are fully integrated into the texts.
IV. SOUTHEAST ASIA
1. Evans, Grant 1990 Lao Peasants under
Socialism. Yale University Press: New Haven. Evans was
allowed to study rural peasant villages and cooperatives near
Vientiane from 1982- 1987.
2. Long, Lyellyn C. 1993 Ban Vinai: the
Refugee Camp. Columbia U. Press: New York. Ban Vinai is a
refugee camp in northeastern Thailand for Laotians and
Cambodians.
3. Lansing, J. Stephen 1995 The Balinese.
Harcourt Brace: Ft. Worth.
* This paperback is one of the series of case studies in
anthropology written for use by under-graduates that used to be
published by Holt, Rinehart, and Winston and now is Harcourt and
Brace. Lansing first did research in the 1970ties on the arts.
Since arts and crafts production were often found in association
with temples, he became aware of the ecological role of temples
in the management of water and his research went off in another
direction. He arranged to have the island-wide world renewal
ceremony held only every 100 years filmed in 1979. The film is
available as "The Three Worlds of Bali". His 1988 film
and water temple and farming is also available as "The
Goddess and the Computer".
4. Sultive, Vinson H., Jr. 1988 The Iban of
Sarawak: The Chronicles of a Vanishing World. Waveland:
Porspect
* Heights, Il. This is one paperback from the Waveland series of
ethnographies for undergraduate which takes a look at the way in
which a tribal population is adapting to a modern world.
V. GENERAL:
1. Evansv, Grant, ed. 1993 Asia's Cultural
Mosaic: An Anthropological Introduction. Prentice-Hall: New
York.
This book is a topical introduction to Asia rather than a
regional one and includes material on India as well. It is rather
complex for a textbook for freshman and sophomore-level courses
as a whole. I choose a few select chapters to put on reserve,
rather than try to use the whole book.
Last updated: 5/18/2000



[About]
[Index]
[Search]
[Other Links]
[Comments/Submissions]


ASDP Curriculum Online Project
<
ASDP@lama.kcc.Hawaii.Edu> 



