
MAT 106  Mathematics Content And Methods
for the Elementary Teacher
 -- Syllabus





MAT 106 MATHEMATICS CONTENT AND METHODS
FOR THE ELEMENTARY TEACHER
COURSE SYLLABUS







PROFESSOR:
Wayne Tingley
 
DATE:
Spring 2002


HOME PHONE:
(765) 677-1091
 
LOCATIONS:
 


OFFICE PHONE:
(765) 677-2999
 
 


OFFICE HOURS:
By Appointment
 

		     


		


E-MAIL:

		wtingley@indwes.edu / waynet@bpsinet.com
 

		     





REQUIRED TEXT:
	Elementary and Middle School Mathematics, VandeWalle, John A., (4th Ed.)
		




  Course Description:
			
			A course in mathematics content, methods and materials for elementary education majors.  Specific teaching methods and materials are considered.  Practice with teaching aids/manipulatives is included.  Content learning and methodology will be emphasized which is developmentally and sequentially appropriate to grades K-6.  MAT 111 is a prerequisite for EDU 106; this course is taken during the Junior Professional Year.  These methods are relative to the NCTM standards which are based on current learning theory and the developmental stages of children.  Field experience provided.  Emphasis is placed on the Indiana Wesleyan University Teacher Education Knowledge Base Model: "The Teacher as the Decision Maker".  It is expected that student will understand their role in becoming a world changer.


			

			Course Objectives:
			

			At the completion of this course, the student should be able to:
			
	Describe and implement the vision of mathematics education put forth in the NCTM Curriculum and Evaluation Standards for School Mathematics.  (I, III, V)
					Plan, design, and execute lessons that accommodate the individual differences in children's math abilities based on concept of the teacher as a decision-maker.  (I, V, VI, VIII)
					Develop teaching strategies that incorporate cooperative learning.  (I, V, VII, VIII)
					Identify the characteristics of a positive classroom environment conducive to tasks and discourse which contribute to learning.  (III, VI)
					Describe the nature of problem solving and the problem-solving process.  State and use many different strategies through logic and reasoning in a contemporary elementary school mathematics program.  (I, V, VI)
					Describe the relationship between real-world experiences and basic mathematics concepts.  (I, V, VI)
					Describe the development of number concepts, beginning on the concrete level and moving through the representative and abstract levels.  ( I, V)
					Model the principles and structures of numeration and place value in lessons for elementary children.  (I, V)
					State and demonstrate a variety of models used to develop an understanding of addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division.  (I, V, VII)
					State the relations between the system of real numbers and its subsystems. (I, VII)
					Develop the concept of fractions in a meaningful way for children.  ( I, V)
					Describe the instructional sequence for the development of operations and their properties in mathematics.  ( I, V, VII)
					Determine the possible outcomes in simple probability exercises after appropriate handling and gathering of data.  (I, V)
					Understand the metric and U. S. customary systems of measurement and integrate the concepts with topics within mathematics curriculum.  (I, V)
					Focus on appropriate development of basic geometry and calculate basic formulas.  (I, V)
					Determine strategies to implement calculator and computer activities which enhance or develop math lessons.
					Develop lessons which integrate problem solving effectively and consistently. (I, V)
					Implement the Indian Wesleyan University knowledge base model "Teacher as the Decision-Maker."  (I, II, III, IV, V, VI, VII, VIII)
					Explore the possibilities for mathematics to foster the attributes of a world changer

			

 Given the guidelines for the NCTM and the Indiana Professional Standard 2c(Mathematics) for teachers of Early and Middle Childhood, this course facilitates the study and implementation with:
	

	The use of problem solving approaches to investigate and understand mathematical content and formulate problems from everyday and mathematical situations.   (I, V, VIII)
					The communication of mathematical ideas in written and oral forms by relating everyday language to mathematical language and symbols.  (I, V, VII)
					The use of models, properties, relationships and patterns to analyze mathematical situations.  (I, V)
					Mathematics as an integrated whole by studying the interrelationships between various branches of mathematics and recognizing its relevance to the real world.  (I, V, VIII)
					The concepts:  (I)
				
	of number and number relationships
						of number systems and number theory
						underlying estimation and computation
						of measurement, standard and nonstandard
						of geometry and spatial sense
						of statistics and probability
				
	The exploration and application of patterns and functions.  (I)
					The application of estimation in working with quantities, measurement, 	computation, and problem solving.  (I, V)
					Various kinds of calculators and computers  (I, V)
					Significant historical and cultural mathematical developments.  (I, V)


	



		This course provides opportunities to demonstrate:
		
	The identification and modeling of the various teaching strategies used in problem solving in the primary grades.
				The use of a variety of concrete manipulative materials for development and exploration of:
			
	pre-numeration concepts
					numbers(whole numbers, fractions, decimals, percents, irrational numbers) and their relationship
					four basic operations with positive and negative rational numbers
					geometric concepts
					measurement concepts
					logical conjectures and conclusions using words such as "all", "some", "none"
					probability, data collection
			
	The use of various kinds of calculators and other technologies as tools for teaching and exploration
			 Classroom management appropriate for the primary school child that includes:
			
	clear communication of mathematics concepts
					various teaching strategies and student grouping
					accommodation of various learning styles
					decisions based on current knowledge
			
	Curriculum development for the primary grades, its relationship to preschool activities, and its significance in the K-12 curriculum.
				Various methods of assessment of student understanding for the purposes of instructional feedback, general mathematical achievement, and program evaluation.
				Early in the program and prior to student teaching, students observe and participate in primary grade mathematics classrooms with qualified teachers.  A variety of experiences including observing, planning lessons, and instructing elementary mathematics are provided.
		

 Course Requirements:

	

		All course requirements are mandatory for student evaluation.
		
 Communication
				
 Materials Critiques - A one page critique utilizing professional materials documenting the student's competency in the utilization of best current practices in teaching.  (Appendix I)  Topics to be assigned.
					 Mathematics Philosophy Statement - The development of a written statement of your philosophy of mathematics education is important proof of your growing knowledge as a pre-service teachers.  You should be able to incorporate your knowledge of mathematics theories, professional standards, and processes and practices into a concise written form which clearly states the ways you will teach mathematics to elementary students.  Your philosophy should be double spaced and no more than two pages long using 12 point type.  (Appendix 5)
				
  Production
				
 Mathematics Teaching Resource Activities - One artifact will be produced for 	your class presentation.  This artifact will demonstrate your ability to produce 	teaching materials of appropriate content and quality.    (Appendix 2)
					 Mathematics Lesson Plan. Use the lesson plan format in Appendix 4.
				
  Performance
				
 Class Presentation/Assessment - The student will demonstrate mastery of content, methods and strategies of teaching elementary mathematics by individual demonstration of these skills in a classroom setting.  (Appendix 3)
					 Exams - Two exams will be given; a mid-term and a final.  Quizzes and examinations will cover content, methods and strategies of teaching elementary mathematics gained from the text, videos, class work and presentations.
				



 	Policies:

	

		Successful completion of course work is based upon the following:  Professional quality of work - completeness, neatness, promptness
				Regular attendance and participation in in-class activities.
				The standard for Indiana Wesleyan Teacher Education Program is " a professional education course completed with less than a 2.0 (C) must be repeated."
			  All assignments are due on the date indicated in this syllabus and on the class schedule.  All assignments are due at the beginning of the class period.  They should be handed to the instructor.  Any assignment submitted late will be lowered by FIVE points for each day late.
			 Attendance at every class is expected.  Since class participation is an integral part of the learning process in this course, for each unexcused absence the student's grade will be lowered 2 points.  Excused absences are submitted from the Dean's office.  Written notification of excused absences must also be submitted prior to the absence by the student to the instructor.
			 Three tardies (5 min. or more) equal one unexcused absence.
		

 Course Evaluation:
		


 
 
 
 
Assignment Evaluation:


95--100
 
A
 
Four Critiques--25 pts ea.


92--94
 
A-
 
Math Resource--25 pts


90--91
 
B+
 
Performance/Assessment Task--25 pts


87--89
 
B
 
Math Lesson Plan--25 pts


85--86
 
B-
 
Math Philosophy--25 pts


82--84
 
C+
 
Midterm Exam--100 pts


78--81
 
C
 
Final Exam--100 pts


76--77
 
C-
 
 


70--75
 
D+
 
 


66--69
 
D
 
 


64--65
 
D-
 
 


0--63
 
F
 
 









    Back


