



University Seminar Fall 2000


University Seminar
GNED 101 Syllabus

Contents
[Instructor | Text | Overview of Course | Grades
]
[Outline and Course Schedule]
[Course Policy | Group
Work on Homework | Late Homework |
Proper Use of Discussion Groups | Students with Disabilities
]


Instructor



Name: Dirk Baldwin



Email: baldwin@uwp.edu





Office: MOLN 355



WWW: http://www.uwp.edu/academic/mis/baldwin





Phone: 595-2449



Office Hours: 4:45-6:00 M, 9-11 W, 9-10 F




Texts
Holkeboer, Robert & Walker, Laurie, Right
From the Start, Wadsworth, 1999.
Resources on WWW:
Your College
Success Center
Course Internet Sites
The syllabus is available at: http://www.uwp.edu/academic/mis/baldwin/Gned101/g101f00.htm
The course also uses discussions, chat rooms, and other materials that are
located at: http://www.blackboard.com/courses/GNED0101Sec12/index.html.
To use the site, you must enroll (free of charge) by clicking I would like to
enroll on this page.
Passport sessions,
activities, and schedules
Overview of Course
The purpose of University Seminar is to provide you with an extended
orientation to college life, and to UW-Parkside in particular. In other courses
you will encounter college through specific bodies of material which constitute
an academic discipline: mathematics, history, political science. In University
Seminar, the subject matter is college itself: its culture, expectations,
demands, and rewards. College can be an exciting and enjoyable time in your
life, but success is not guaranteed. In this course you will learn tools,
techniques, strategies, and critical thinking skills that will help you
throughout college. Additionally, you can view the course as "anticipatory
advising". This advising will recommend study habits, make you aware of
campus activities, help you choose a major, and a career. 
Course Objectives
Through this course students will:

Develop a better understanding of why they are in college.
Make progress toward the development of realistic career and life goals,
      and understand the educational and personal implications of these
      goals. 
Develop or improve certain abilities essential to being successful in
      college including information literacy, study skills, time management,
      presentation skills, communication skills, and critical thinking.
Become familiar with the University of Wisconsin-Parkside policies,
      procedures, academic programs, general education requirements, graduation
      requirements, university resources, and services.

Learning Methods
The course objectives will be met through the use of class discussion,
participating in internet discussion groups, participating in the passport
program, completion of the university's information literacy requirement,
writing exercises and an in-class presentation.  The course uses an
"active" style of learning. Students should read the assigned material
before class and complete the assigned exercises by  the due date so that they are prepared to
discuss the material. In addition, students will have an opportunity to discuss
the material and suggest material to discuss through the class internet
discussion site.  Within the first few days of the course, the student will
complete the College Student Inventory. The results of this survey will be used
by the student to select passport sessions or exercises. These sessions or
exercises are completed outside of class and include topics such as time
management, note taking skills, and diversity. The course culminates with an
in-class presentation regarding a controversial topic (of the student's
choice).
Learning Assessment
Learning will be assessed through the evaluation of written and oral
presentations. Written work involving each of the four objectives sited above
will be submitted by email or by participating in the course's internet
discussion group. Oral presentations will be made on the last day of class (the
10th class).
Written homework and presentations will be evaluated based on the following
criteria:

Subject. Did you respond to the assigned problem or topic?
Argument. Did you gather relevant information, make appropriate
    assumptions, and use a logically sound argument?
References. Where appropriate, did you use a citation?
Organization. Did the paper/presentation flow well from beginning to end?
Expression. Are your sentences clear in meaning and varied in structure?
    Did  you use proper grammar and spelling? Did you use charts, graphs,
    pictures or animation effectively?

Grading
Points will be accumulated throughout the semester. Grades will be determined
by summing the points: 93-100 A, 90-92 A-, 87-89 B+, 83-86 B, 80-82 B-, 77-79 C+,
73-76 C, 70-73 C-, 60-69 D, less than 60 F.  
Points will be earned through the following activities: 

2 pts. per class attended (maximum of 20 points)
Max. 2 pts. per "pre-class" question that is posted to the class
    discussion site. A "pre-class" question must be posted at least 24
    hours prior to the class. The question(s) should be consistent with the
    topic for the day. I will do my best to answer the question during the
    class. (maximum of 2 pts./class period for a total of 18 pts.).
Max. 2 pts. per class follow up question posted to the class discussion
    site. A follow up question must be posted within 48 hours after a class and
    must be consistent with the topic discussed in the prior class (maximum of 2
    pts./class period for a total of 20 pts).
HW pts. (max points per HW is posted below)
Max. 5 pts./Passport session attended and corresponding reflections on
    learning completed (max. 15 points). Reflection on learning papers are due
    by Dec. 8. You can submit no more than two papers between Dec. 1 and Dec.
    8.

Outline and Course Schedule
The following outline and schedule may be changed at the
discretion of the instructor. 
Overview of DBMS


Date

Reading

HW

Subjects



Sept. 6
Chpt. 1
Complete College Student Inventory by Sept. 8 (5 pts.)
Overview and Introduction. Introduce Web and Blackboard.


Sept. 13
Chpt. 2-3
Turn in career center notes by Sept. 15 (5 pts.)
Career Center Presentation. The basics for success.


Sept. 20
See readings below
 
Critical Thinking. Creating a presentation with
          PowerPoint.


Sept. 27
Chpt. 4-5
Complete critical thinking exercises (5 pts.)
Managing Time, Review Critical thinking
          exercise, PowerPoint


Oct. 4
Chpt. 6
 
Studying. WWW page design.


Oct. 11
Chpt. 7
Complete PowerPoint HW (5 pts.)
Information Literacy Exercise (finish by end of
          semester) (5 pts.) 

The Library and Information Literarcy.


Oct. 18
Chpt. 8
 
Test Management. Ethics. WWW page design.


Oct. 25
Chpt. 9-11
 
Extracurricular activities. Values, culture, and
          relationships. Health and stress


Nov. 1
Chpt. 12
 
Planning for Success other


Nov. 8
 
Presentations (10 pts.)
Presentations


Dec. 8
 
Finish Web pages (5 pts.) 
Last day to submit papers from Passport sessions (see
          Grading note above).

 


Critical Thinking:
Read the following from the WWW:

Basics
    of Critical Thinking
Elements
    of Critical Thinking
Intellectual
    Traits
Universal
    Intellectual Standards
Thinking
    and Content
Grading
    Standards for Critical Thinking

Optional Readings

Mission Critical
    (click Part 1, 2, 3, 4 on the left for a tutorial and sample questions).
Brief
    History of Critical Thinking

Group Work on Homework Assignments 
Students must complete their own homework. Copying homework is
not allowed. If help is needed, the student is encouraged to ask
the professor or another student. Note there is a fine line
between "help" and completing homework for a student.
Students should be careful not to cross this line. 
Late Homework
Homework must be turned in by 1:00 pm of the specified due date. There is
a 20% per day penalty for late homework. 
Discussion Group Postings (proper use) 
The discussion group is designed to facilitate discussion of the class
material before and after class. You are encouraged to respond to previous
postings. As you post your questions and comments, you must obey the following: 

Do not post copyrighted material without the proper references.
Do not pose as someone else.
Do not forward the private email of others to the discussion group.
Do not use vulgar language in the discussion group.
Harassing other students through the discussion group will not be
    tolerated.
Do not post advertisements to the discussion group.

I reserve the right to remove inappropriate postings to the discussion group.
Repeat offenders of the above guidelines will lose the right to post to the
discussion group.
Disabled Students
Any student who, because of a disabling condition, may require
some special arrangements in order to meet course requirements
should contact the instructor as soon as possible to make
necessary accommodations. 


    Last modified: September 21, 2000
Dirk Baldwin, MIS, UW-Parkside, dirk.baldwin@uwp.edu



