





Race, Politics, and Gender in American Music--Syllabus


Race, Politics, and Gender in American
Music
AMTH 024
Georgetown University, Spring 2002

Please feel free to email me at pwarfield@mac.com
if you have any questions about the course.
Georgetown students should checkblackboard
for the latest information


Instructor Information: 
Instructor: Patrick Warfield 
Email: pwarfield@mac.com
Phone: 703 799-7850 (use between 9:00am and 9:00pm) 
Office hours: Walsh 304, before and after class by appointment 
Course hours: TR McNeir, 4:15-5:30 

Course Description: 
Although often studied as an abstract art,
American music often finds itself at the center of controversies
involving race, politics, gender, and cultural identity. This
course will explore these intersections between American cultural
and musical life. Although the body of the course will focus on
music between the Civil War and the 1970s, we will investigate
the role of music in a wide variety of America's defining
moments. These range from the role of political songs before and
during the Revolution, to the search for an American opera in the
nineteenth century, to Tin Pan Alley ethnic songs.  We will
also examine music's role in such movements as Prohibition,
Abolition, the Harlem Renaissance, and hip-hop culture. Students
will be asked to complete readings from a wide variety of
scholarly sources and to demonstrate their understanding of the
course materials through class discussion, a journal, reaction
papers, and exams.  No prior musical background or training
is assumed or required. 
Course Objectives: 
We cannot possibly hope to cover all of
American music history in one semester, so this course will focus
on a series of case studies, each of which highlights a moment in
American history where issues of identity intersect with music
(both classical and popular). Given that we will be exploring a
wide range of musical styles and historical topics, I expect
there will be something in the course of interest to everyone.
Students are, of course, invited to suggest other topics than
those listed on the syllabus, and to relate the topics we discuss
in the class to those which affect your daily lives. By the end
of the course all successful students should: 

Be able to describe how American music has
        taken part in the defining moments of American history.
Identify contemporary issues where music
        does, or might, play a role in issues involving race,
        politics, and identity.
Be able to take part in an intelligent
        discussion of music, using terms and ideas that are
        common among musicians, and do so at a sophisticated
        level.
Be able to easily identify a number of
        specific pieces of American music and musical styles.

Course Materials 
Course readings and listening are available in
the library. Most readings are also available through
Georgetown's electronic reserves. The
listening CDs can be found the Gelardin Center in the Library,
and should be available on their streaming server. Students are
encouraged to go to the library early and make copies of the
assignments. Students must do the assignments before the class
period to which they pertain. As you can see, some weeks have
very lengthy assignments. Students are encouraged to look ahead
on the syllabus and plan accordingly.  If you are planning
on not doing the assignments for this class, or not doing them
seriously, please drop the course now. 
Tips for Succeeding: 
Georgetown assumes that you will complete three
hours of class time and six hours of study time per course, per
week. I will do my best to assign you four hours of reading and
listening per week, this means that you should be able to spend
at least two hours a week reviewing and thinking. If you squander
this time during the first few weeks of class, you will find the
last weeks of the semester busy and painful. If, however, you
keep up on the readings and listenings, you should have no
problems achieving the aims of the course, breezing through the
exams and assignments, and still have a great time. 
Since much of this course will be discussion
based, it is vital that you not only do the assigned readings and
listenings before attending class, but also spend some time
thinking. Come to class with questions, comments, disagreements,
even out-right fights. The more you think, the more successful
the entire course will be, and the better grade you will earn. If
you are planning on not doing the assignments for this class, or
not doing them seriously, please drop the course now. 
Grading: Your grade will be determined
by four criteria: 

Attendance and Discussion: 10%
        All students are expected to attend all class meetings,
        and to do all assignments before each class
        meeting. You should come to class prepared to answer and
        to ask questions about the readings and music for that
        day. Needless to say, you should do all assignments on
        time. But come to class, even if you are unprepared. The
        core of this course is in what we do together in class.
        Missed work can always be made up; a missed class is gone
        forever.  Excessive absences will result in a
        significant grade penalty. Let me say that again,
        excessive absences will result in a significant grade
        penalty.  Students will be expected to follow the
        guidelines explained on the Course Contract. 
Quizzes and Short Assignments: 15%
        Several quizzes (unannounced) will be given during the
        course of the semester. The one lowest grade will be
        dropped. Assignments will include short class
        presentations and attendance at one of Georgetown's
        Friday afternoon concerts. A review of this concert will
        be included as part of the reading and listening journal
        described below.
Reading and Listening Journal: 25%
        For each reading and some listening assignments, students
        will write a journal entry. This journal will be turned
        in twice  during the semester. See further
        instructions. 
Exams: 50%
        Two exams will be given during the semester, each
        counting 25% of the final grade. Student should expect
        objective questions as well as essays on the exams. You
        should also be able to identify by title, composer, and
        date (within five years on either side) any of the pieces
        you have been assigned.

Warnings: 

Unfortunately there is no textbook for a
        course of this type. That means that the music itself
        will be our principal text. Many students who have not
        had experience with critical listening forget that
        listening, like critical reading requires your full
        attention. You should take notes, re-listen, and discuss
        the music in the same ways you might take notes, reread,
        and discuss a reading assignment. In other words, do not
        assume that you can do the listening on your car CD
        player, or while cooking dinner. Give yourself plenty of
        time to do, and think about, each assignment. I advise
        doing each listening assignment at least twice. Listening
        cannot be rushed!
Turning in late assignments makes it
        difficult for me to grade them and is unfair to the other
        students. The due dates and exam dates listed on this
        syllabus are not suggestions, but rather requirements.
        Please come to class on time, ready to turn in
        assignments at the start of the class period. Extensions
        will be given only in cases of real emergencies.
Please look carefully at the topics listed
        on the syllabus.  Some students assume that a class
        of this type will primarily cover popular music of the
        last half century (1960s anti-Vietnam songs, hip-hop,
        etc.).  While these traditions will form an
        important part of this course, they are by no means the
        only types of music we cover (nor do they even make of
        the majority of our topics).  Students should be
        prepared to listen to, learn, and think about, not only
        popular songs, but also symphonies and operas. 
        Students interested only in popular music should not take
        this course.

All that said I think anyone
taking the class seriously will have a good time and earn a good
grade.

Course Schedule:
Week 1: Introductions

Class 1 (January 10):
    Introductions

Week 2: The Materials of Music

Class 2 (January 15): The
    Materials of Music: Melody and Rhythm 



Reading: Course syllabus, web pages,
            and Materials
            of Music handout
Listening: Pick a popular song, of
            which you have a recording, and come prepared to
            discuss it in terms of the Materials of Music
            reading. Bring your recording 



Class 3 (January 17): The Materials
    of Music: Harmony and Texture

Reading: Materials of
            Music handout
Reading: Resources in American Music


Week 3: American Music: Performers and
Composers 

Class 4 (January 22): Performers and
    Composers 

Reading: Richard Crawford,
            "American Music and its Two Written
            Traditions," Fontes Artis Musicae 31
            (1984): 79-84. [Electronic reserves]
Listening: Several performances of
            "The Star-Spangled Banner" on CD 1

Class 5 (January 24): Race,
    Politics, and Gender: Ideas, Contexts, Theories

Assignment: Bring in one piece of
            music which you think says something about gender or
            race. It may deal with these topics in its lyrics,
            but it MUST also deal with them through the music
            itself. What kind of theoretical frame do we need to
            have to understand your piece. 


Week 4: Music, Gender, and
Twentieth-Century American Women

Class 6 (January 29):
    "Living to Tell": Madonna

Reading: Susan McClary, "Living
            to Tell: Madonna's Resurrection of the Fleshly"
            in Feminine Endings. [Electronic reserves]
Listening: Selections from Amy Beach
            and Madonna on CD 2.

Class 7 (January 31): Womens'
    Voices: Janika Vandervelde and Laurie Anderson

Reading: Susan McClary, "Getting
            Down Off the Beanstalk: The Presence of a Woman's
            Voice in Janika Vandervelde's Genesis II."
            [Electronic reserves]
Listening: Selections from Janika
            Vandervelde and Laurie Anderson on CD 3.


Week 5: Womanhood and the Nineteenth
Century 

Class 8 (February 5): The Cult of
    True Womanhood: Jenny Lind 

Reading: Austin Caswell, "Jenny
            Lind's Tour of America: A Discourse of Gender and
            Class" in Festa Musicologica: Essays in Honor
            of George J. Buelow. [Electronic reserves]
There is no listening assignment, but
            come prepared to discuss these questions.

Class 9 (February 7): "One
    of the Boys": Mrs. H. H. A. Beach 

Listening: Selections by Amy Beach, on
            CD 4.


Week 6: Hip Hop and the Problem of Race

Class 10 (February 12): Rap and
    Hip Hop Culture

Reading: William Eric Perkins,
            "The Rap Attack: An Introduction." in Droppin'
            Science. [Electronic reserves]

Class 11 (February 14): Modern
    Minstrels?: Public Enemy

Reading: Rob Walser, "Rhythm,
            Rhyme, and Rhetoric in the Music of Public
            Enemy" in Ethnomusicology. [Electronic reserves]
Listening: "Fight the Power"
            by Public Enemy on CD 5


Week 7: Dvorak and an American Music

Class 12 (February 19): Dvorak's
    America

Reading: Michael Pisani, "The
            Indian Music Debate and `American' Music in the
            Progressive Era," in The College Music
            Symposium (1997). [Electronic reserves]
There is no listening assignment, but
            come prepared to discuss these questions.

Class 13 (February 21): Indianist
    Music in America

Selections from Antonin Dvorak and
            Arthur Farwell on CD 6.


Week 8: A Detour and a Midterm

Class 14 (February 26): Summary
    and Review: A Word from the Ivory Tower

Reading: Milton Babbitt, "Who
            Cares If You Listen?" in High Fidelity
            (1958). [Electronic reserves]
Listening: Milton Babbitt, Composition
            for Four Instruments on CD 7.
Review for exam

Class 15 (February 28): Midterm and turn
    in journals

Week 9: Spring Break (no class March
5 and 7)
Week 10: Blacking Up: Minstrelsy in
America

Class 16 (March 12): Introduction to
    Minstrelsy

Listening: Early minstrel selections
            on CD 8.

Class 17 (March 14): Theories of
    Blackface

Reading: Eric Lott, "Love and
            Theft: The Racial Unconscious of Blackface
            Minstrelsy" in Representations (1992). [Electronic reserves]


Week 11: George Gershwin and an American
Opera

Class 18 (March 19): Porgy
    and Bess

Reading: Porgy and Bess guide
Listening: Porgy and Bess highlights
            on CD 9

Class 19 (March 21):
    Reactions to Porgy and Bess

Reading: Richard Crawford, "It
            Ain't Necessarily Soul: Gershwin's Porgy and Bess as
            a Symbol," Yearbook for Inter-American
            Musical Research (1972). [Electronic reserves]


Week 12: Jewish Identity

Class 20 (March 26): The Jewish Jazz
    Singer


NO CLASS ON MARCH 28

Week 13: The Harlem Renaissance

Class 21 (April 2): Duke Ellington

Listening: Selections by Edward
            Kennedy "Duke" Ellington on CD 10

Class 22 (April 4): William Grant Still

Reading: Samuel A. Floyd, Jr.
            "The Harlem Renaissance of the 1920s" Black
            Music Research Bulletin 10 (1988), 8-10. [Electronic reserves]
Reading: Langston Hughes, "The
            Negro Artist and the Racial Mountain." [Electronic reserves]
Listening: William Grant Still, Afro-American
            Symphony on CD 11.


Week 14: Rock in the 1960s

Class 23 (April 9): A War Comes Home:
    Vietnam and Rock

Listening: 1960s Political Song on CD 12.

NO CLASS ON APRIL 11

Week 15: Politics and Music

Class 24 (April 16): Marc Blitzstein
and McCarythism

Listening: Selections from Marc
            Blitzstein, The Cradle Will Rock on CD 13.

Class 25 (April 18): The Hutchinsons and
    Nineteenth-Century Protest Music

Reading: Caroline Moseley, "The
            Hutchinson Family: The Function of their Song in
            Ante-Bellum America," Journal of American
            Culture 1 (1978), 713-23. [Electronic reserves]
Listening: Nineteenth Century
            Political Song on CD 14.


Week 16: Politics and Review

Class 26 (April 23): William
    Billings and the Founding Fathers

Reading: Arthur Schrader,
            "`Wilks', `No. 45', and Mr. Billings." American
            Music 7 (1989), 412-429. [Electronic reserves]
Listening: Selections by William
            Billings on CD
            15.



Class 27 (April 25): Review and turn in journals

Week 17: Final Exam

Class 28 (April 30): Final Exam



This page was created and maintained by Patrick Warfield 


