

CS 4970-001/5973-002 - Intro to Intelligent Robotics - Spring 2002




Syllabus
CS 4970-001/5973-002 - Introduction to Intelligent Robotics - Spring 2002



Course Title:
Introduction to Intelligent Robotics


Instructor:
Dean Hougen,
EL 128, 405-325-3150,
hougen@ou.edu


Class Hours:
Monday, Wednesday, Friday, 11:30-12:20, Sarkeys Energy Center N202A
(was: Carson Engineering Center 31)


Office Hours:
Monday, 1:00-2:00; Wednesday, 2:00-3:00; EL 128


Text Book:

Required: Introduction to AI Robotics, Robin Murphy, 2000,
MIT Press.  (ISBN 0-262-13383-0)

Students should read ahead the chapters that are expected to be covered in
the class period.  Students should always bring their textbook with them to
class, including lectures/discussions, group work days, and exams.



Recommended (for Grad Students): Writing for Computer
Science: The Art of Effective Communication, Justin Zobel, 1997,
Springer.  (ISBN 981-3083-22-0)



Communication:

The primary means of transmitting class information to the students
will be through announcements during class time, announcements in the
Message of the Day file, and web pages.


The best way for students to communicate with the instructor is to come
to scheduled office hours.  If you cannot attend office hours in person,
phone calls can be accepted but students present in the office will get
priority.  Email can also be used but a quick or detailed personal response
is unlikely as I get a lot of email and responding to email can be
very time consuming.


The best way for students to communicate with one another has yet to be
determined.


Details of all of the communication methods follow:
WWW:
Information about this class will be found on the class website.
        The URL is 

        http://www.cs.ou.edu/~hougen/classes/Spring-2002/Robotics/

        This page will contain links to the directory of class materials and
        announcements, the message of the day, and other important
        information.
    Email:
Students should use the email addresses listed above.  Note that I
        get a lot of email.  Do not expect a reply in minutes; one or
        two days is more likely in most cases.  If you have not heard back
        within five days, please resend your message, if it is still
        relevant.
    MOTD:
A message of the day will be placed in the class file directory.
	    To automatically view this file on login, students should add the
        command
            cat ~hougen/www/classes/Spring-2002/Robotics/materials/MOTD
        to their .login (or other shell start-up) scripts.



Expectations and Goals:
The prerequisite for this course is instructor permission.  You are
expected to have a sufficient background in Computer Science to be able to
support team projects involving robots.  Relevant courses include Computer
Science 2413 - Data Structures and Computer Science 2334 - Programming
Structures and Abstractions, although other backgrounds are possible.  You
are expected to have a working knowledge of a high-level object-oriented or
imperative language, including a familiarity with its basic data types and
control structures.  A background in AI such as that provided by Computer
Science 4013 - Artificial Intelligence may be useful but is not a
requirement.


This course will introduce students to the state of the art in
Intelligent Robotics and cover the principles involved.


Topics:

History of Intelligent Robotics
The Functional Modules Approach
Reactive Robots
        
Ethology for Roboticists
Architectures and Methodologies
Implementation
Sensing


Hybrid Deliberative/Reactive Robots
Multiple Robots
Navigation
        
Topological Path Planning
Metric Path Planning
Localization and Mapping





Computer Accounts and Software:
All students in this class should have a CS account.  This will
be used for writing programs and sending and receiving materials
electronically.  All code written for this course MUST run using the
compilers or interpreters that will be specified for the assignments.  You
may do your development work on whatever system you choose but it is your
responsibility to ensure that your code runs on the school systems.
If you do not have an account, one will be generated for you based on the
class roster.  I will hand out your account information in class.


Requirements:
The graded assignments and their contribution to a student's grade are
given in the table below.  (Subject to change.)






Item



Undergrads



Grads




Group Projects
Exams
Homework
Technical Paper Reviews




50%
30%
20%
--




40%
25%
15%
20%





All homework, exams, and technical paper reviews in this course are to be
done alone; the work submitted by a student must be the
student's own.  Group work is required for the projects; students will be
assigned to groups with specific roles and tasks given to each group
member.


You may write your programs from scratch or may start from programs for
which the source code is freely available on the web or through other
sources (such as friends or student organizations). If you do not start
from scratch, you must give a complete and accurate accounting of
where all of your code came from and indicate which parts are original,
which are changed, and which you got from which other source.  Failure to
give credit where credit is due is academic fraud and will be dealt with
accordingly.


All work must properly cite sources.  For example, if you quote a
source in your technical paper review, you must include the
quotation in quotation marks and clearly indicate the source of the
quotation.


Assignments are due at the beginning of lecture (at 11:30) on the due
date.  Late assignments will be penalized 20% per day late.  (All parts of
days will be rounded up.)  After five days, you will not be able to turn in
that assignment for credit.  If you are worried about turning in the
assignment late and loosing points, turn in the assignment ahead of time.
You will be turning in electronic and paper copies of group projects.  It
is the electronic copy that must be turned in by class time on the day that
it is due.  The paper copy is due twenty four hours after the electronic
copy.  The paper copy may be submitted in class or turned in during office
hours or by slipping it under my office door.


All exams will be open book/open notes.  NO electronic devices will
be permitted in the testing area.


Copying another's work, or possession of electronic computing or
communication devices in the testing area, is cheating and grounds for
penalties in accordance with school policies.


Accommodations:
Any Student with a disability should contact the instructor so that
reasonable accommodations may be made for that student.




