 Spanish Civil War - PRELUDE07  Spanish Civil War  1931 - Spanish Republic proclaimed April 14 - end of the monarchy  no more King Alfonso 13th - moderates & Pres. Azana electedimage at right of map from ILN 1943/04/24 (andbig) 1st dimension = a civil conflict  Republicans vs Loyalists (or Liberals vs conservative Nationalists) but anti-monarcy Republican movement divided from beginning: socialists, communists, Trotskyite workers party, anarcho-syndicalists (esp. in Barcelona = spontaneous, militant), Basque & Catalonia separatists 1933 elections - won by conservatives  under clerical leader Gil Robles Falange f. - Spanish fascist party "In an electoral system that heavily favoured coalitions, the decision of the Socialists to go it alone in the elections of November 1933 was a tragic error. It gave power to a right-wing determined to dismantle the Republic's social reforms. Employers and landowners celebrated the victory by cutting wages, sacking workers, evicting tenants and raising rents. The largest party, the Catholic CEDA, wasn't offered power because the Republican president suspected its leader, Jose Maria Gil Robles, of harbouring fascist ambitions to establish an authoritarian, corporative state. Thus, the conservative Radical Party ruled. " (Paul Preston 1996) 1934 General Strike led by the Socialist trade union Union General de Trabajadores (UGT),  the anarcho-syndicalist CNT, the communist Alianza Obrera (workers' alliance).poster at right from Anarchy Archives collection of Spanish Civil War images1936 elections - social revolutionaries won narrow victory Feb. 16   Popular Front organized by Manuel Azana, leader of the Left Republican party, and Indalecio Prieto, centrist leader of the socialist party.began revolution against clericals, landowners  strikes, assass., attacks on church, collectivization of farmsJuly 17, 1936 - revolt of the Morocco garrison   Gen. Francisco Franco & army joined conservatives and Catholic CEDA to put down social revolution - became "Nationalists" Republican government tried to use fleet to blockade Franco's Foreign Legion from crossing into SpainFranco breaks blockade with Junkers 52 and Savoia-Marchetti transport planes sent by Hitler and Mussolini image at right of Franco reviewing troops in 1939 from Time 1972/12/11by Nov,  Republicans in defensive positions - triangle of 3 cities (as well as Basque) Madrid, Valencia, BarcelonaStalin sends tanks and planes to aid the cities  2nd dimension = international conflict  civil war stalemated - then new dimension addedforeign powers intervene "Little World War" map at right from Time 1937Italy & Germany = pro-NationalistFrance = pro-Republican (under new Leon Blum & Popular Front) July 1935 7th Comintern declared Popular Front but French public opinion divided - unable to commit aid   instead, joined Britian as neutralRussia = pro-Republican; aid began after Oct. 1936  Stalin sent arms, pilots esp. sent political advisors to indoctrinate, take over Republican leadershipSocialist Juan Negrin becomes premier May 1937 image at right of Stalin in peasant dress in 1936, from FDRL 3rd dimension = ideological conflict   International Brigades young anti-fascist idealists from Eng, France, Italy, Germany Italian anti-fascist brigade defeated Mussolini's fascist troops at Guadalajara 1937Abraham Lincoln Brigade from U.S.  led by Capt. Robert Merriman - 450 Americans volunteer called "a young communist" but mysterious 1st action - Jarama valley - 127 killed images at right from Marion Merriman's book Robert Capa's photos (image at left is "Moment of Death"- published in Life magazine 1937/07/12)Ernest Hemingway's novels - in 1940 pub'd For Whom the Bell TollsGeorge Orwell - came home disillusioned - in 1938 pub'd Homage to Catalonia - about Republican dissension, communist deceit - in 1949 pub'd 1984 - about totalitarianism1937 reached crisis - defense of Madrid ag. 4 converging fascist columns   while a "5th column" betrayed the Republicans inside the cityGermany tests new weapons  Junkers Trimotor bombers, Heinkel fighters, incindiary bombsGuernica bombed Apr. 26, 1937   Pablo Picasso's modern artwork "Guernica" was returned in 1981 to the Prado in Madrid after 42 years at the Museum of Modern Art in New York - see Picasso's Guernica Unveiled 1500 dead, 800 wounded old town completely destroyed but arms plant and railroad were undamaged, and the symbolic Basque tree and Basque archives were also undamaged done by German Condor Legion at suggestion of Franco, not Hitler.  The Nationalists denied the bombing and attempted to put the blame on the Republicans or the Basques.  This is the argument of Luis Brolin in his 1967 book Spain, the Vital Years.The story written by George Steer for the London Times April 27 and reprinted in the New York Times April 28 put the blame on the fascists and created the myth of Guernica as the innocent victim of a terrorist bombing:  "Guernica was not a military objective.... The object of the bombardment was seemingly the demoralisation of the civil population and the destruction of the cradle of the Basque race."  However, Hugh Thomas in his 1961 book The Spanish Civil  War, and Phillip Knightley in his 1975 book The First Casualty, argue that it was bombed for tactical military objectives.    May 31, 1937 - German warships killed 19 in a bombardment of the Republican coastal town of Almeria, in retaliation for the bombing of the German battleship Deutschland, and in June, after the German cruiser Leipzig claimed it was attacked by Republican submarines, Germany and Italy withdrew from the joint naval patrol that had been established by the Non-Intervention Committee in April. mid-1938 - Stalin decided to stop aid to Republicans  western democracies not helping, Franco winning military battles Stalin's disillusionment with West would lead to Nazi-Soviet Pact Aug. '39 Jan. 1939 - Barcelona fellFeb. 10, 1939 - Catalonia fellMarch - Valencia and Madrid fellimage at right of Italian soldiers parade in Spain, ILN 1939/03/04100,000's refugees fled Spain for France, North Africa, Mexico schoolteacher Murray Burnett visits Europe, returns to write 1940 play Everybody Comes to Rick's, that becomes the 1942 Hal Wallis film Casablanca, with Bogart playing the fictional American Rick Blaine who once ran guns in Ethiopia and had fought in Spain.  Franco's rule was harsh - imprisoned 1 million after end of waraccording to Ambass. Willard Beaulac's memoirs, Franco became a "silent ally" of U.S. during WWIIU.S. recognizes Franco April 3, 1939 U.S. Response:Jan. 6, 1937 - Mandatory Spanish Arms Embargo passed Dallek says FDR wrong - tied himself to inflexible policy of supporting Anglo-French policy of preventing any spreading of local conflicts into world war FDR also embroiled in Court plan after Feb 5 image at right of FDR's inauguration Jan. 20, from FDRL (big)May 1 - FDR signs 1937 Neutrality Act  mandatory arms embargo with belligerents mandatory travel ban on belligerent ships mandatory loan ban to belligerents mandatory ban on arming of American merchant ships trading with belligerents discretionary cash-and-carry for 2 years (Bernard Baruch's plan to allow trade with belligerents in non-contraband goods if paid in cash and carried in foreign ships) RESOURCES:  images from llustrated London News (ILN), Franklin D. Roosevelt Library (FDRL), Time and Life magazines.  See image page for additional images and maps.Carroll, Peter N. The Odyssey of the Abraham Lincoln Brigade: Americans in the Spanish Civil War. Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press, 1994. An account of the Lincoln Brigade of 2800 American volunteers who fought in the Spanish Civil War from January 1937 to October 1938 against Franco, with high casualties and 1/3 dead.Dallek, Robert. Franklin D. Roosevelt and American Foreign Policy. NY: Oxford, 1979.Merriman, Marion and Warren Lerude. American Commander in Spain: Robert Hale Merriman and the Abraham Lincoln Brigade. Reno: University of Nevada Press, 1986.Preston, Paul. "Viva la Revolucion," New Statesman & Society, Feb 16, 1996, v9 p18 (4). This article is critical of the Ken Loach film Land and Freedom that argues "the fight of the brigaders and of the Spanish people was not a fight against Spanish fascism and its German and Italian allies, but rather part of an internecine leftist in which the central enemy was the Communist Party.  Despite many merits, Loach's script seems oblivious of two central facts about the Spanish civil war: in its origins, it was a Spanish social war and, in its course and outcome, it was an episode in a greater European civil war that ended in 1945."Swan, Christopher, "Museo del Prado" from Christian Science Monitor, July 10, 1984.The Abraham Lincoln Brigade Archives (ALBA)Spanish Civil War index from Canadian Forces College   <- -> | 1918-38 Timeline page |  more WWII links |  Pictures | Maps | Documents | Bibliography | revised 2/8/01   