


Syllabus - Postmodernism and the Culture of Cyberspace



English 295 - Postmodernism and the Culture of Cyberspace
Vanderbilt University


Professor Jay Clayton
Fall 1996
MWF 1:10-2:15
Tolman 222



Description:
What is cyberspace and how does it relate to the literature, movies,
music, art, lifestyles, politics, and sexuality of the postmodern world?
 The word "cyberspace," coined by the science fiction writer
William Gibson in 1984, refers to the virtual world created by communication
over the internet.  Debates about this new mode of experience swirl
around questions of pornography on the internet, hacking, race and gender
stereotypes, First Amendment rights, freedom of information, and copyright.
 Literary scholars argue about how computers will transform research,
textual editing, models of reading and writing, and the nature of literature.
 Novelists and film makers attempt to imagine the future of a wired
society, while corporate culture strives to cash in on the World Wide Web.

This course will explore the emerging culture of cyberspace through readings
of cyberpunk fiction; novels about the boundary between human and artificial
life; movies that use cyborgs and virtual reality to speculate about the
role of technology in society; hypertext fiction, which must be read on
the computer and attempts to banish linear sequence; critical writing about
the future of the internet; and literary theory, including works on the
nature of postmodernism, the definition of cyberspace, and the future of
criticism, scholarship, and editing in an age of hypertext.

No computer expertise is required.  Although there will be frequent
assignments requiring access to the World Wide Web, the techniques for
using the net will be explained for those who have no previous experience. 
Each student will construct his or her own Web page; the class will have
its own interactive computer bulletin board; and all writing assignments
will be turned in and graded by email. Computer illiterates and rank beginners
are encouraged to sign on.


Readings:

Most assigned readings will be on the web.
Photocopied materials will be available in the Reserve Room of the
Library.  They may be checked out for 2 hours.
Shelley Jackson, Patchwork Girl (Eastgate Systems disk, Rand
Bookstore)
Wiiliam Gibson, Neuromancer (Rand Bookstore)
Richard Powers, Galatea 2.2 (Rand Bookstore)



Requirements: 

Weekly participation in class newsgroup
Hypertext project 
Web page project 





Student Projects





Mandy Albright - Laugh of the Medusa Page





Brian Boling - De La Soul Page 




Myka Carroll - Adrienne Kennedy Page 




Kirby Hopkins - Walker Percy Page 






Kevin O'Donnell - Codex/Archive Theory




Amanda Restifo - "Nuts in the Chutney"




Kim Stoiber - Star Wars Page 




Miki Wallace - Home Page 



Semester Schedule

Week 1: Introduction

Aug. 28 (Wed.) - Class procedures
Aug. 30 (Fri.) - Entering Cyberspace (microcomputer lab, Garland
Hall) 

Viewing: The Net
Surfing (in class): Kevin Hughes, "What
is the Internet?";  Hypertext
and the Web;  HTML
and URLs
Recommended: A
Beginner's Guide to HTML



Week 2: Humanists in Cyberspace

Sept. 2 (Mon.) - Reading: John Unsworth, "Not
Your Average Fool: The Humanist on the Internet"
Sept. 4 (Wed.) - Reading: Michael Heim, "The
Erotic Ontology of Cyberspace," from The Metaphysics of Virtual
Reality (New York: Oxford UP, 1993), 82-108
Sept. 6 (Fri.) - (microcomputer lab, Garland Hall) 

Reading: Mark Dery, "Flame Wars," in Dery, ed. Flame
Wars (Reserve Room) 
Surfing (in class): Literature Resources on the Web. IATH;
 Voice of the Shuttle;
 Jack Lynch's
page at Upenn; Victorian
Web;  The
Electronic Text Center at UVA: The Modern English Collection;
 CETH 



Week 3: Cyberpunk--Origins 
Sept. 9 (Mon.) 

Reading: William Gibson, Neuromancer
Recommended: Study
Guide for William Gibson: Neuromancer

Sept. 11 (Wed.) - Reading: 

William Gibson, Neuromancer (Cont.)
Bruce Sterling, "Preface" to Mirrorshades
Istvan Csicsery-Ronay, "Cyberpunk
and Neuromanticism"

Sept. 13 (Fri.) - (microcomputer lab, Wilson Hall)

Reading: William Gibson, Neuromancer (completed)
Surfing (in class): ChibaMoo



Week 4: Replicants and Cyberpunk 
Sept. 15 (Sun.) - Viewing: Ridley Scott, Blade Runner
(1992)
Sept. 16 (Mon.) - Surfing: 2019:
Off-World (Blade Runner Page)
Sept. 18 (Wed.) - Reading: 

Bruce Sterling, "Cyberpunk
in the Nineties"
Bruce Sterling, "Twenty
Evocations"



Week 5: Cyborgs and Biopolitics 
Sept. 22 (Sun.) - Viewing: James Cameron, Terminator 2: Judgment
Day
Sept. 23 (Mon.) 

Reading: Donna Haraway, "A Manifesto for Cyborgs."
 
Surfing: Border
Crossings (resource page); Hyperlink
to Donna Haraway (resource page)

Sept. 25 (Wed.) - Reading: 

Kathleen Woodward, "From Virtual Cyborgs to Biological Time Bombs:
Technocriticism and the Material Body," in Culture on the Brink,
pp. 47-64 (Reserve Room)
Margaret Morse, "What Do Cyborgs Eat? Oral Logic in an Information
Society," in Culture on the Brink, pp. 157-89 (Reserve Room)

Sept. 27 (Fri.) - Reading: Allison Fraiberg, "Of
Aids, Cyborgs, and Other Indiscretions: Resurfacing the Body in the Postmodern."
  (No class meeting--attend Patricia Meyer Spacks lecture on Monday,
4:10-5:00, Wilson 126)


Week 6:  Gender in Cyberspace 
Sept. 29 (Sun.) - Viewing: James Cameron, Aliens (1986)
Sept. 30 (Mon.)

Reading: Shannon McRae, "Coming
Apart at the Seams: Sex, Text and the Virtual Body";  Julian
Dibbell, "A
Rape in Cyberspace"
Lecture: Patricia Meyer Spacks, "Arrangements of Self-Love" -
4:10-5:00 (Wilson 126)
Surfing: Visit Shannon
McRae's Homepage

Oct. 2 (Wed.)

Reading: Allucquere Rosanne (Sandy) Stone, "Violation
and Virtuality."
Surfing: Visit Sandy
Stone's Homepage;  Cybergrrl
Webstation

Oct. 4 (Fri.) - 

Reading: Keng Chua, "Gender
and the Web."  
Workshop: Introduction to Web Page Construction (microcomputer
lab, Wilson Hall)



Week 7:  Hypertext: An Introduction
Oct. 6 (Sun.) - Viewing: Lawnmower Man 
Oct. 7 (Mon.) - Reading: 

Jay David Bolter, Writing Space, Ch. 1 (Reserve Room) 
George P. Landow, Hypertext:
The Convergence of Contemporary Critical Theory and Technology, Ch.1
Richard Lanham, The
Electronic Word, Ch. 4 

Oct. 9 (Wed.) - Reading: 

Sven Birkerts, "The
Fate of the Book" (Conference Presentation, September 15-16, 1995)

Jerome McGann, "Radiant
Textuality" 

Oct. 11 (Fri.) - Workshop: Construct a practice web page(microcomputer
lab, Wilson Hall).  In Netscape 3.0 Gold, click on the "File"
menu, then choose "New Document."  From the popup menu that
appears, choose "From Wizard."  Read directions, then press
"Start." Complete as many of the steps as you have time for.
 If you want to go to another web site while working on yours, click
"File," then "New Web Browser."  This will open
a second copy of Netscape, which you can browse at your leisure, looking
for URLs or images to copy.  Save your web page twice: once to
your folder on the Wilson Lab server, then again on a floppy disk.  Bring
the disk to class (with your name on it) Monday.



Week 8: Hypertext Theory/Fiction 
Oct. 13 (Sun.) - Viewing: Lawnmower Man II 
Oct. 14 (Mon.) - Reading: 

George P. Landow, "What's a Critic to Do?: Critical Theory in
the Age of Hypertext," in Landow (ed.), Hyper/Text/Theory,
pp. 1-48 (Reserve Room) 
Stuart Moulthrop, "Rhizome and Resistance: Hypertext and the Dreams
of a New Culture," in Hyper/Text/Theory, pp. 299-319 (Reserve
Room) 

Oct. 16 (Wed.) - Reading: Shelley Jackson, Patchwork Girl.
 From the Title Page, follow the link to Sources.  Then, after
returning to the Title Page, follow the link to Phrenology and complete
all the links that open out from this page.  Feel free to browse any
of the other paths.  You should also work with the four different
map utilities until you understand how they work. 

Oct. 18 (Fri.) 

Reading: Shelley Jackson, Patchwork Girl
Workshop: Interactive discussion of Patchwork Girl.  Bring
laptops to class.



Week 9: Hypertext Reading/Writing 
Oct. 20 (Sun.) - Viewing: Atom Egoyan, The Adjuster (1991)
Oct. 21 (Mon.) - Reading: Interactive discussion of Patchwork
Girl.  Bring laptops to class.
Oct. 23 (Wed.) - Reading: Jean Baudrillard, "The Ecstasy of
Communication" (Reserve Room) 
Oct. 25 (Fri.) - Oral report: Preliminary description of hypertext
writing project. 



Week 10: Hypertext Reading/Writing 
Oct. 27 (Sun.) - Viewing: Terry Gilliam, Brazil (1985)
- Garland 101 (note changed movie location) 
Oct. 28 (Mon.) - Conclude discussion of Patchwork Girl.  Bring
laptops to class. 

Reading: George Landow, "Stitching
Together Narrative, Sexuality, Self: Shelley Jackson's Patchwork Girl"

Reading: Shelley
Jackson Forum in HotWired (12 March 1996) 
Browsing: Patchwork
Girl Comments Etc. 

Oct. 30 (Wed.) - Hypertext Design.  

Reading: Kathleen Burnett, "Toward
a Theory of Hypertextual Design," (paragraphs 13-28) 
Reading: Stuart Moulthrop, "Traveling
in the Breakdown Lane A Principle of Resistance for Hypertext"


Nov. 1 (Fri.) - Hypertext workshop (Wilson Hall computer lab)



Week 11: Hackers 
Nov. 3 (Sun.) - Viewing: Bryan Singer, The Usual Suspects
(1995) 
Nov. 4 (Mon.) - Reading: Larry McCaffery, "Introduction: The
Desert of the Real," in Storming the Reality Studio 
Nov. 6 (Wed.) - Reading: Bruce Sterling, The
Hacker Crackdown: Law and Disorder on the Electronic Frontier - "Preface
to the Electronic Release," "Introduction," and "Part
1: Crashing the System" 
Nov. 8 (Fri.) - Reading day: Bruce Sterling, The
Hacker Crackdown: Law and Disorder on the Electronic Frontier "Part
2: The Digital Underground"



Week 12: Hackers 
Nov. 10 (Sun.) - Viewing: Pulp Fiction 
Nov. 11 (Mon.) - Reading: Bruce Sterling, The
Hacker Crackdown: Law and Disorder on the Electronic Frontier "Part
3: Law and Order"
Nov. 13 (Wed.) - Reading: Bruce Sterling, The
Hacker Crackdown: Law and Disorder on the Electronic Frontier "Part
4: The Civil Libertarians" and "Electronic Afterword to The
Hacker Crackdown, New Years' Day, 1994"
Nov. 15 (Fri.) - Hypertext workshop

Reading: John Caine, "Writing
The Story of Carmen & Janet" 
Workshop: Writing hypertext (Wilson Hall computer lab)



Week 13: Stuart Moulthrop--New Frontiers in Web Hypertext Fiction
Nov. 18 (Mon.) - Javanese

Reading: Stuart Moulthrop, "Hegirascope"
.  (Be sure to read "About This Text.") 
Browsing: Stuart Moulthrop's new (11/14/96) Homepage
(Java version.  If you do not have Java, download it from Sun.)

Nov. 20 (Wed.) - Hypermedia with Java

Reading: Stuart Moulthrop and Sean Cohen, "The
Color of Television" 
Exercise: Register with media ecology, then click on
the "dialogue" button in "The Color of Television"
and post a short response to Moulthrop and Cohen's text.

Nov. 22 (Fri.) - 

Reading: Stuart Moultrhop, "Pillars
of Wisdom, Pillows of Folly" 
Browse for examples of hypertext design: Stuart Moultrhop, "The
Shadow of an Informand: An Experiment in Hypertext Rhetoric";
Nancy Kaplan, "E-Literacies:
Politexts, Hypertexts, and Other Cultural Formations in the Late Age of
Print" 
Bibliography: Resource page for HTML: John Unsworth's list of
manuals
from his course, "Theory and Practice of Hypertext" (UVA, fall,
1996).  Resource pages for more examples of hypertext design:  Carol
Guyer, "Web
Hyperfiction Reading List" (annotated); Tom Goldpaugh, "Hypertext
Sites and Essays" (annotated); Michael Shumate, "Hyperizons:
Hypertext Fiction" (annotated in places).  
Workshop: Writing hypertext (Wilson Hall computer lab) 



Thanksgiving Vacation (November 23 - December 1)


Week 14: Living in an Information Order 
Dec. 2 (Mon.) - Reading: Richard Powers, Galatea 2.2
Dec. 4 (Wed.) - Workshop (Wilson Hall computer lab)
Dec. 6. (Fri.) - Workshop (Wilson Hall computer lab)


Week 14 (cont.): Conclusion 
Dec. 9 (Mon.) - Workshop:  Resource page and draft of hypertext
project due.  (Wilson Hall computer lab)


Final due dates of course materials
Dec. 13 (Fri.) - Comments on class hypertexts due.  Post comments
on the class newsgroup.
Dec. 19 (Thurs.) - Final version of hypertext project due.



Send email to claytojb@ctrvax.vanderbilt.edu

  Return
to Jay Clayton's Home Page
 Return
to Vanderbilt English Department Page      Return
to Vanderbilt University Main Page

last modified 12/10/96


