


Management Information Systems



Management Information Systems


Analysis of IT Industries

North American and global economic, political and legal factors affecting
the organization, growth and performance of IT industries, including trade
in services, privatization, strategic alliances, technology transfer, standards,
and government regulations. Syllabus. Calendar. Lecture notes. Assignments.
Student work. Links to related materials. By Andres Fortino, George Mason
University. 

Application
Program Development I

Requirement analysis,input/process/output, algorithm development using
pseudocode, use of CASE tools, and program testing. Structured and object-oriented
design. Syllabus, calendar, assignments, exams, and links to related materials.
By Richard D. Heath, Saint Cloud State University. 

Business Data
Communications

Technical concepts, strategic use of telecommunication in business,
and managerial issues surrounding development and operation. Syllabus,
calendar, lecture notes, assignments, grades, student work, and links to
related materials. By Anthony A. Verstraete, Penn State University. 

Business
Data Processing

Business applications and implementation of information technology.
Syllabus. Calendar. Assignments. Grades. Links to related materials. By
Craig K. Tyran, Oregon State University. 

Business Information
Systems

Course. Syllabus, calendar, lecture notes, assignments, exams, grades,
and links to related materials. By Anthony A. Verstraete, Penn State University.


Business Use of the Internet

Graduate-level. Syllabus, calendar, and links to related materials.
By Christopher Rhoda, Thomas College. 

Computer
Literacy and Windows 95

Self-paced. Basic nomenclature of the computer, using Windows 95 as
the operating system. Syllabus, calendar, assignments, and grades. By Jeff
Forrest, Metropolitan State College of Denver. 

Computer Systems
and (Without) Programming

Information systems development and changes that result from new technology
and changing business needs. Syllabus, assignments, student work, and links
to related materials. By Tsvi Vinig and Hein Mevissen, Vrije Universiteit,
The Netherlands. 

Decision Support
Systems

Knowledge-management approach. Syllabus, lecture notes, discussion forums,
Powerpoint slides, and links to related materials. By C. W. Holsapple,
University of Kentucky. 

Discrete
Event Systems Simulation

Course. Syllabus, calendar, lecture notes, assignments, grades, and
links to related materials. By Hossein Arsham, University of Baltimore.


Emerging Technologies

Course. Syllabus, calendar, lecture notes, assignments, and links to
related materials. By Christopher Rhoda, Thomas College. 

Global Issues in
Information Technology

Telecommunications, Internet, computer-based workgroups, and network-based
production and logistics management systems in multinational and transnational
organizations. Syllabus, calendar, lecture notes, assignments, student
work, and links to related materials. By Dolly Samson, Weber State University.


Impact of New Information
Resources: Multimedia and Networks

Social impact of technology. Syllabus, assignments, student work, and
links to related materials. By Howard Bresser, University of California,
Berkeley. 

Information Systems
for Managers

Future directions and challenges. Syllabus. Calendar. Lecture notes.
Assignments. Exams. Student work. Links to related materials. By Tralvex
Yeap, University of Southern Queensland. 

The Information Society

Course. Syllabus, calendar, lecture notes, assignments, exams, and links
to related materials. By Ewan Sutherland, University of Wales, Lampeter,
UK. 

Information Technology

Management of information technology for individual productivity and
organizational competitive advantage. Syllabus, calendar, lecture notes,
and assignments. By Lai Lai Tung, Amit Das, and Gabriel Goren, Nanyang
Business School, Singapore. 

Information Technology
and Telecommunications

Graduate-level. Syllabus. By Alev M. Efendioglu, University of San Francisco.


Information Technology
for Management

Improvement of productivity and promotion of competitive positions in
the marketplace. Syllabus, calendar, lecture notes, assignments, student
work, and links to related materials. By Dolly Samson, Weber State University.


International Issues
in Telecommunications

Course. Syllabus, calendar, lecture notes, guest speakers, assignments,
exams, and links to related materials. By Stephen Ruth, George Mason University.


Internet for
Business

The Internet as a business phenomena and tool. Students create a Web
site for a proposed business. Syllabus, assignments, calendar, and links
to related materials. By Trivison and Brhel, David N. Myers College. 

Introduction
to Information Systems

Graduate-level. Syllabus, lecture notes, student work, and links to
related materials. By Catherine Middleton, York University, Canada. 

Introduction to Management
Information Systems

Computer and information systems concepts, some of the most popular
software tools currently available. Syllabus. Calendar. Assignments. Links
to related materials. By David J. Albert, University of Texas - Austin.


Knowledge Engineering

Expert systems, artificial neural networks, genetic algorithms, hypertext/hypermedia,
Internet/intranet. Syllabus, calendar, assignments, student work, and links
to related materials. By Siripong Malasri, Christian Brothers University.


Management Information
Systems

Course. Lecture notes, assignments, exams, and supplemental readings.
By Brian Butler, Carnegie Mellon University. 

Management
Information Systems

Database management, knowledge management, intellectual capitalism,
extracting business value, computer systems, operating systems, internet
systems, creating www pages, legal issues of the web, portals, ecommerce,
intranets, extranets, and Y2k. Syllabus. Lecture notes. Assignments. Exams.
Grades. Links to related materials. By Glenn Owen, University of California
at Santa Barbara, California. 

Management
of Information Technology

Course. Course syllabus, overview, and assignments. By Blake Ives, Southern
Methodist University. 

Managing Electronic Commerce

Online retailing, banking, and publishing. Syllabus, calendar, lecture
notes, assignments, exams, and links to related materials. By Ravi Kalakota,
University of Rochester. 

Managing Information
Systems

Course. Syllabus. By Ken Cohen, Park College - Columbus Resident Center.


Programming Language:
Visual C++

Course. Syllabus, calendar, lecture notes, assignments, and links to
related materials. By Christopher Rhoda, Thomas College. 

Riding
the Information Superhighway

Internet tools (graphical browser and UNIX shell). Business implications.
Syllabus, calendar, lecture notes, and assignments. By David Jankowski,
California State University, San Marcos. 

Small Systems Technology
- NT 4.0 Workstation Certification

Principles of operation of PCs, basics of PC support and maintenance,
and aggressive preparation for Microsoft certification exam 70-073, Windows
NT 4.0 Workstation. Can be taken for no credit by a diligent WWW distance
learner. Syllabus. Calendar. Lecture notes. Assignments. Exams. Grades.
Links to related materials. By Geoff Howard, Kent State University. 

Spreadsheet Applications

Building templates, combining spreadsheets, designing macros, using
financial and statistical functions, preparing graphs, and manipulating
data by using sorts and queries. Syllabus. Calendar. Assignments. Grades.
Links to related materials. By Terry Redman, Saint Leo College. 

Spreadsheets
with Excel 97

Self-paced. Creating and editing workbooks, command structures, graphics,
and formulas. Syllabus, calendar, assignments, and grades. By Jeff Forrest,
Metropolitan State College of Denver. 

Strategic
Information Systems Management

An executive perspective on strategic management in an organisation.
Syllabus, calendar, and assignments. By David Algeo, University of Dublin,
Trinity College, Ireland. 

Strategic Management
for High Technology Industries

Graduate-level. Industry, firm, and product analysis at a strategic
level in the context of high technology industries. Hypercompetitive situations.
Syllabus, calendar, lecture notes, assignments, student work, and links
to related materials. By Timothy W. Ruefli and Aldor Lanctot, University
of Texas at Austin. 

Systems Analysis I

System development case assignments involving a fictitious company.
Syllabus, calendar, lecture notes, assignments, grades, and links to related
materials. By Geoff Howard, Kent State University. 

Systems
Analysis and Design

Information systems that meet the demands of end users. Methods, tools,
and techniques. Alternative approaches to IS development; methods to gather
user requirements; process and data-oriented modeling tools used to understand,
communicate, and document organizational requirements; database design;
user interface design; distributed systems; software inspection techniques.
Syllabus. Calendar. Assignments. Grades. Links to related materials. By
Craig K. Tyran, Oregon State University. 

Systems
Analysis and Design

Management's role in the development process. Initial stages of the
systems development life cycle. Syllabus, calendar, lecture notes, assignments,
and exams. By David Jankowski, California State University, San Marcos.


Systems
Design and Implementation

Responsive and long-lasting software. Syllabus, calendar, lecture notes,
assignments, exams, and student work. By James C. Brancheau, University
of Colorado at Boulder. 

Systems Development Methodologies

Lecture materials and student presentations on RAD, Neural Net, Object-Oriented,
WWW Application, and Project Management methodologies in PowerPoint. Syllabus.
Calendar. Lecture notes. Assignments. Exams. Grades. Student work. Links
to related materials. By Geoff Howard, Kent State University. 

Various Case Studies

Case studies on innovation and project management, commerce on the Web,
and other topics. Syllabus. By various professors, Southern Methodist University.




 
Go
Back To Homepage


