




Distance Education Journals and Readings










<!--
.indexhead {  font-family: Arial, Helvetica, sans-serif; font-size: large; font-weight: bold; color: #CC0033}
.indexsubhead {  font-family: Arial, Helvetica, sans-serif; font-size: medium; font-weight: bold; color: #CC0033}
.headline {  font-family: Arial, Helvetica, sans-serif; font-size: x-large; font-style: normal; font-weight: bold; font-variant: normal; color: #CC0033}
.subheadgreen {  font-family: Arial, Helvetica, sans-serif; font-size: medium; font-style: normal; font-weight: bold; color: #006600}
.subheadblue { font-family: Arial, Helvetica, sans-serif; font-size: medium; font-style: normal; font-weight: bold; color: #000099}
-->








Last Update: August 13, 2002

 









 

Journals and Readings
Some journals are available entirely online whereas others provide 
              links to further information available in print. At the bottom of 
              the alphabetical list of titles are additional resources for Bibliographies 
              and Online Journal Collections.
Journals and Newsletters


American Journal of Distance 
                Education
AJDE is an internationally recognized journal of research 
                and scholarship in the field of American distance education. It 
                is designed for use by teachers in schools, colleges, and universities; 
                trainers in corporate, military, and professional fields; adult 
                educators; researchers; and other specialists in education, training, 
                and communications. Edited by Michael G. Moore. 
                
 Association for the Advancement 
                of Computing in Education
AACE produces several print publications and provides online 
                information about titles such as: WebNet Journal, Journal of Interactive 
                Learning Research (JILR), and the International Journal of Educational 
                Telecommunications (IJET). AACE is an international, educational, 
                and professional organization.

CADE : Journal of Distance 
                Education/Revue de
                l'enseignement à distance
The Journal of Distance Education is an international publication 
                of the Canadian Association for Distance 
                Education (CADE). Its aims are to promote and encourage Canadian 
                research and scholarly work in distance 
                education and provide a forum for the dissemination of international 
                scholarship. Original material is published in 
                either English or French. 


The Chronical 
                of Higher Education
                Distance Education Section
                This World Wide Web site is a service of The Chronicle of Higher 
                Education. Published weekly. The Chronicle is a news source for 
                college and university faculty members and administrators. A subscription 
                to The Chronicle includes free access to all of this Web site 
                and to daily electronic-mail updates.

DEOSNEWS

                This monthly electronic journal complements The American Journal 
                of Distance Education by promoting distance education scholarship, 
                research, and practice.The Distance Education Online Symposium 
                was established in 1991 by The American Center for the Study of 
                Distance Education at Penn State. 
                
Distance 
                Education: An International Journal
The aim of the journal is to engender and disseminate research 
                and scholarship in distance education, open learning and flexible 
                learning systems. Published twice a year, in May and October, 
                by Open and Distance Learning Association of Australia (ODLAA). 
                
Distance 
                Education Systemwide Interactive Electronic Newsletter (DESIEN)
Each issue offers original articles which emphasize distance 
                education themes or focus items. News, updates, conference information, 
                and contributions by subscribers are also regularly included. 
                

Educause Publications
EDUCAUSE Information Resources provide access to collections 
                of materials related to managing and using information resources 
                in higher education. These include materials developed by EDUCAUSE 
                and other organizations.

The Electronic 
                Journal on Information Systems in Developing Countries (EJISDC)
                An international forum for practitioners, teachers, researchers 
                and policy makers to share their knowledge and experience in the 
                design, development, implementation, management and
                evaluation of information systems and technologies in developing 
                countries.

European Journal of Open 
                and Distance Learning
                Presents a forum for discussion of ODL issues at all educational 
                levels and in all training contexts.

 Interactive Educational 
                Multimedia
A forum for intellectual debate about training using information 
                and communication technologies and the application of virtual 
                environments in education, the publication of multimedia materials, 
                the cognitive processes and associated learning, and the empirical 
                results of its study.


 International Review of Research 
                  in Open and Distance Learning (IRRODL)
The purpose of IRRODL is to disseminate scholarly knowledge 
                  in open and distance learning theory, research, and best practice 
                  to distance education practitioners and scholars worldwide. 
                  

The Internet and Higher 
                Education
The Internet and Higher Education is a quarterly journal designed 
                to reach those faculty, staff, and administrators charged with 
                the responsibility of enhancing instructional practices and productivity 
                via the use of Information Technology (IT) and the Internet. 
                
Journal 
                of Asynchronous Learning Networks (JALN)
The Journal of Asynchronous Learning Networks (JALN) contains 
                research articles that describe original work in ALN, including 
                experimental results, as well as major reviews and articles that 
                outline current thinking. 

 Journal 
                of Distance Learning Administration
The Journal of Distance Learning Administration is a peer-reviewed 
                electronic journal offered free each quarter. The Journal welcomes 
                manuscripts based on original work of practitioners and researchers 
                with specific focus or implications for the management of distance 
                education programs. 
                
 Journal of Interactive 
                Media in Education (JIME)
JIME has developed a journal review environment in which submitted 
                articles and open peer review are tightly integrated with each 
                other, and central to the journal's operation. Published by the 
                Knowledge Media Institute of the Open University. 
                
 Journal of Library 
                Services For Distance Education
The Journal of Library Services for Distance Education is 
                a peer-reviewed e-journal. International in scope, this scholarly 
                e-journal will publish refereed articles focusing on the issues 
                and challenges of providing research/information services to students 
                enrolled in formal post-secondary distance education. 
                
NetWorking
Networking is a biweekly bulletin dedicated to disseminating 
                news and information about activities and developments in distance 
                education and learning technologies at Canadian colleges, universities, 
                and organizations, published by the NODE Learning Technologies 
                Network. 
                
Online 
                Chronicle of Distance Education & Communication
The Online Chronicle of Distance Education and Communication 
                is the electronic source for information about distance education 
                produced by Nova Southeastern University. It appears quarterly 
                and provides an information exchange related to distance education 
                and online communication. 

SatNews Online Magazine
Contains information on the commercial satellite industry. 
                Other features include links to other satellite websites; information 
                on satellite companies, satellites & operators; a calendar of 
                industry events; financial & technical analysis; telecommunications 
                facts and figures, and more. 
                
SyllabusWeb
SyllabusWeb is a free service from Syllabus Press, publishers 
                of Syllabus magazine and producers of the annual Syllabus conference. 
                This site contains information on technologies used to enhance 
                education. 
                
Technological Horizons 
                in Education (T.H.E.) Journal Online
News on the world of computers & related technologies, focusing 
                on applications that improve teaching & learning for all ages.

Training 
                and Development Magazine
Training & Development is an official publication of the American 
                Society for Training & Development, a not-for-profit association 
                of professionals in the field of human resource development, workplace 
                learning, and performance improvement.

The Turkish Online Journal 
                of Distance Education-(TOJDE)
International in scope, this e-journal publishes refereed 
                articles focusing on the issues and challenges of providing theory, 
                research/ information services to students enrolled in any level 
                of distance education on open learning applications.

The Virtual University 
                Gazette
                This free electronic newsletter for distance learning professionals 
                from geteducated.com covers the Internet University movement. 
                It offers stories on industry/university collaborations, emerging 
                trends and issues related to online learning at the adult and 
                continuing education levels, and more. 
                
Virtual 
                University Journal
                Virtual University Journal provides a unique international vehicle 
                for the publication of papers relating to research, innovative 
                thinking and/or practice in the field of distance learning.


Bibliographies


Bibliography 
                on Computer Based Assessment and Distance Learning 
                A fully searchable collection of over 500 references maintained 
                by Sal Valenti, University of Ancona

Distance 
                Education Articles
                Developed as part of the Faculty Services section of the UT TeleCampus 
                of the University of Texas. All references have links to full 
                text articles on the web and focus on online teaching and learning.

Bibliography 
                from degree.net
                In addition ot the general reference books such as those by John 
                Bear, Petersons, and others, this listing includes some specific 
                references to areas such as financial aid and medical schools.

Bibliography 
                from the Education Coalition
                TEC's recommendation for books in the areas of Distance Learning, 
                Education, Training, Technology and Funding. All references are 
                available for online purchase.

Recommended 
                Reading for Internet Educators
                This list from Online Class has a K-12 focus. It includes books 
                and other references for teachers interested in using the Internet 
                in the classroom. Books are available for online purchase. 

TeleEducation NB

Studies: 
                  Distance Education and Trends 
                  From the collection at TeleEducation NB this listing contains 
                  numerous studies in distance education. Each reference has a 
                  brief annotation and all are accessible online. 

Articles-Distance 
                  Education 
                  This collection of full text articles has been selected by Dr. 
                  Rory McGreal, Executive Director of TeleEducation NB, New Brunswick, 
                  Canada. The articles are selected because of their particular 
                  concern on the effectiveness of distance education and its impact. 
                


 

Collections 
              of Online Journals

ICDL Literature 
                Database
                The literature database of the International Centre for Distance 
                Learning (ICDL) contains bibliographic information on over 12,000 
                books, journal articles, research reports, conference papers, 
                dissertations and other types of literature relating to all aspects 
                of the theory and practice of distance education. 

Publications 
                on the Web:
                Journals, Magazines, and Newsletters Collection
                Developed by the Center for Instructional Technology at the University 
                of North Carolina, this is a list of scores of journals, magazines, 
                and newsletters covering educational technology, multimedia development, 
                computers and computer programming, the Internet, and related 
                topics that can be accessed, in whole or in part, on the World 
                Wide Web. Links are also included to newspapers and other publications 
                that may be of interest to faculty and staff. 

Electronic 
                Journals
Journals listed include articles related to learning technologies, 
                communications and culture. From the University of Colorado at 
                Denver, School of Education. 
            

 New 
                Jour; the New Journal and Newsletter Announcement List for 
                new serials on the Internet. 
                

Internet 
                  Public Library; all manner of books and other texts that 
                  are freely available over the Internet. Browsable and searchable 
                  by author, title, or Dewey Subject Classification. 
            
 
 






<!--
.footer {  font-size: smaller; font-style: normal; font-weight: normal}
-->

Suggestions or additions for the page? Please 
  contact us.
  Can't find what you are looking for? Try our search 
  options.
If you have trouble accessing this page, require this information in an 
  alternative format or wish to request a reasonable accommodation because of 
  a disability contact webmanager@ics.uwex.edu

 
  Distance Education Clearinghouse
  www.uwex.edu/disted 
  Managed and produced by the University of Wisconsin-Extension
©Copyright 2002. Board of Regents. University 
  of Wisconsin

 





Definitions
Glossaries
Overviews
Other Distance Education Sites 




Today's Distance Education Headlines
Conferences and Events
Organizations and Associations
Journals and Readings



Catalogs
Certificate Programs
Virtual Universities



Delivery Methods
Technology Selection
Technical Support



Faculty and Teaching
Instructional Design
Case Studies
Student Readiness



Evaluation
Statistics
History, Trends and Forecasts



Accessibility 
Legislation
Funding 
    Resources and Grants 
Intellectual 
    Property and Copyright



Higher 
    Education
K-12
Business 
    and Industry
Military 
    and Government
Health
International 
    Issues
Job 
    Opportunities



Library Support
Training
Electronic Discussion Groups



Statewide Distance Education Resources
University of Wisconsin-Extension Conferencing
    UW Learning Innovations



About 
    Us
Some 
    of Our Other Sites
Contact 
    Information

 






