
 Advanced Communication for Management Syllabus. Weber 



MHR 325
ADVANCED COMMUNICATIONS FOR MANAGEMENT
COURSE SYLLABUS--SPRING 2002
DR. WARREN C. WEBER
  E-MAIL: wcweber@csupomona.edu
Phone: (909) 869-2433
Office: 94-270


Class Times: 


 Section 1--M-W, 4:00 p.m. - 5:50 p.m. (MHR 32501--CRN 20621), Room 6-122.

Office Hours: 

Monday and Wednesday: 2:40 to 4:00 p.m. and by appointment. 
Click section names to find them quickly, click arrows to return here:





Course Objectives

Prerequisites

Texts Required


Grading Percentages

Form of Evaluation

Presentation of Project

Examinations

Method of Assigning Letter Grades

Bonus Incentive Points

Attendance, Participation, and Make-Up Exams

Student Preparation

Weekly Assignments

Final Examination

Recap of Activities & Requirements

Expanded Outline of Course Content


1.  COURSE DESCRIPTION
MHR 325 Advanced Communication for Management (4)


Advanced communications applications for managers. Practice in writing situational letters/reports. Conducting meetings and conferences. Interpersonal techniques: listening, interviewing. Advanced use of computers for presentations. Case studies. Employee and media interviews. Multicultural and ethical considerations.
Research methods. 4 lecture-problem solving. Prerequisite: MHR 324.


2.  COURSE OBJECTIVES
Upon completion of the course, students are expected to:

Use communications tools and technologies for advanced organizational communications tasks, and understand the role of technology in managerial communications;
Apply advanced principles of effective written and oral communication for management. Improve the ability to apply a clear, concise, objective, natural writing style;
 Know principles of conducting effective meetings and conferences;
Apply techniques of research and writing of reports;
Utilize advanced visual support to enhance written and oral communications;
Be able to write and present business case studies effectively; and, 
Improve interpersonal communications skills such as listening, interviewing, and multicultural awareness.




3.  PREREQUISITES

MHR 324 (Communication for Management), English 104, and CIS 101.


4.  TEXTS REQUIRED



Callihan, Steve.  Learn HTML in a Weekend, (3d Edition).  
Prima Communications, 2000.

Other: Three or four 3 1/2 inch Double-Sided, High-Density (HD) disks. Dictionary, Thesaurus (electronic or hard copy). (If you don't have one yet, sign up for an e-mail account in 98-B1-208 of the CLA Building, across from the Campus Information Desk.)  You will need an InTRAnet account for access to certain materials and for creating your own WEB pages. The Intranet account is obtained in the Computer Commons CLA 5-13 (The person to see is GeeGee Crews.)



5. GRADING PERCENTAGES


Grades will be assigned on the basis of the following percentages (Tentative):


Attendance, attitude & participation  20
Class & homework assignments, quizzes  20
Term Project, Presentation, Web Pages, and Binder  50
Final Examination  10
Total100




 6.  FORM OF EVALUATION
Class Assignments and Homework. The cases, problems, and exercises assigned are to be done completely, neatly and on time according to the more complete instructions given in class at the time of the assignments. The classwork and assignments are to be kept in a binder that may be checked periodically and turned in near the end of the quarter. Web pages will be posted and critiqued.


Presentation of Project. The research performed will result in a team report to be presented using PowerPoint and the WorldWideWeb (WWW). All team and individual project materials will be included in a binder to be submitted at the end of the quarter. Presentations are approximately seven to eleven minutes in length for each individual in the team and are be made to measure the ability to communicate and clearly inform the audience about the nature of the problem, background, methods, findings and conclusions of the project. The use of audio-visual aids is MANDATORY (PowerPoint, Web Pages, etc.) during the presentation. Presentation grades will be assigned on the basis of peer and instructor evaluations.


Examinations. The examinations may consist of case study analyses, written communications (letters, memos, etc.), multiple choice, true/false, essay questions, or application exercises that measure the ability to know and apply principles of good communication.  Other types of questions may be included.  The questions will cover the lectures, class discussions, activities, films/videos, exercises, and textbooks. 


7.  METHOD OF ASSIGNING LETTER GRADESGrades are assigned based on the evaluations of each student's work compared to others in the class and in previous sections of this class. The percentages indicated in 5, above, and the grading system in the 1999-2001 University Catalog are factors. A system of Stanines (Standard Nine-Point Scale) is used to calculate the value of grades. Letter grades (A, B, C, D, or F) are assigned on the basis of the instructor's evaluation of student work compared with the work of other students completing classwork. An I (Incomplete) grade will be given only if sufficient, but not all, work has been completed for good cause. The I(ncomplete) will be changed to a letter grade when all work is completed according to University Policy.



Bonus Incentive Points (BIPs) may be earned to improve poor test grade, make up for unavoidable absences or late assignments, etc., or merely to raise the final grade received. Bonus work consists of additional work similar to those completed for regular classwork. (Examples include: Periodical Reports--Abstract and Analysis with Applications, extra typed letters, additional reports on communication topics, arranging a guest speaker) See instructor for additional details.


8.  POLICY ON  ATTENDANCE , CLASS PARTICIPATION, AND MAKE-UP EXAMINATIONS
Attendance, attitude, and preparation are important. Positive contributions to the class can provide rich, reciprocal learning experiences. The right attitude means: a desire and willingness to study and learn, preparation as directed, and putting forth effort even when it may be inconvenient or difficult. It means: being ready to answer questions when called upon, volunteering answer to questions or asking questions (even when you feel they may seem a little "dumb"), and actively listening to the instructor and other class members. 

Carrying too many units, working too many hours, etc., (usually symptoms of poor time management) cannot be given weight in the determination of the final grade.  Absences (as well as tardies) will definitely negatively affect grades. Make-up exams are  exceptions, and only given on the basis of instructor/student agreement for significant and compelling reasons. The attendance portion of the grade is calculated below, modified by attitude and participation. The total number of absences/tardies, regardless of the reason, determine the grade for this portion of the course. Memorandums to the instructor explaining necessary absences can help mitigate their effect, and BIPs can reduce the impact of absences.

ABSENCES AND GRADES
(2 Tardies = 1 Absence) 

    Number of Absences

0 = A 
1 = A-
2 = B 
3= B-
4 =  C 
5 =  D 
6 or more =  F




9.  STUDENT PREPARATION
Students are expected to have all lessons prepared on the dates indicated (papers, presentations, etc.), to come class with the required materials, to take notes, and to read the assignments by the dates due. Assignments turned in late normally receive one grade lower than they would otherwise earn. You must have an active Cal Poly intranet account and periodically purge your account of unnecessary materials to avoid "diskquota exceeded problems" that prohibit you from getting mail or posting materials. If you forget your password, click here for instructions on how to get a new password immediately.

10.  ADD-DROP POLICYDetailed information regarding "Add/Drop Policies and  the Assignment of Incomplete Grades" is available in  the Student Advising Center,
Building 6, Room 218, from your Department Office, and from the University Catalog. 



11.  WEEKLY ASSIGNMENTS--MHR 325 (Tentative. Subject to Amendment and Change)

 Link to Learn HTML In A Weekend--Reader-Support Page
(http://www.callihan.com/learn3/index2.htm) 

Members of ACM, Inc., for Spring 2002

Week 1
April 3. Orientation. Introductions. Class Plan and Organization. Purchase Textbook.  Make sure Intranet Account Is working. (Check with Computer Commons, CLA 5-13 or Enterprise Computing Help Desk, 98-B1-208). Mail may be checked from other locations at: http://webmail.csupomona.edu:8000. E-Mail and Web Browser usage.    What is ACM, Incorporated?  Homework:  LearnHTML--Friday Evening, Getting Oriented.

Week 2
April 8. Group organization within ACM, Incorporated.. Exploring the Web & E-Mail--VAX/VMS Mail, Netscape Message Center, M/S Outlook, AOL Instant Messenger. Setting Preferences. How to join mailing lists. The MHR325 List--Joining and Using.  Review of final Group Binder contents. HTML Tag Guide. HTML Exercise.  Homework: LearnHTML--Saturday Morning, Learning the Basics.
April 10.   Finding and Using HTML Tutorials. Brainstorming Project Ideas.A GDSS List of Ideas. Developing Marks and Logotypes (Word, PowerPoint Drawing, FreeHand, Illustrator, Clip and Word Art, etc.).  
 ***The Electronic Database Assignment.*** First E-Mail Due Today.  Homework: LearnHTML--Saturday Afternoon, Dressing Up Your Pages.
Week 3
April 15. Searching the Web. Using search engines for background research data and Additional Project Ideas.   Using Steve's  Internet Library and HTML Tutorials. Use of File Transfer Protocol (ftp) tools for downloading and uploding files. Using WS_FTP. Posting Your Web Pages to the Intranet. (LearnHTML: Appendix G) Creating a web page using Netscape Composer. Homework: LearnHTML, Working with Tables.
April 17. How drawing, illustration, paint, image manipulation, and page layout programs work.  Refer to the  Cal Poly Graphic Communications Services Website and its link to the Cal Poly Graphic Standards Manual. Also see:   Design Management Institute,  Corporate Design Foundation and other web sites for ideas on the development of Identity, Logos, Letterheads, etc.  Homework: LearnHTML, Working with Frames.

Week 4
April 22. Research Techniques. Writing Style--Formal Reports. The Paramedic Method. Writing Abstracts. The Format Guide. Using Adobe Acrobat Reader to view and print Portable Document Format (PDF) Files. The Logo Factory--Professional Logo Development. Review of Individual and Team Web Pages to Date.Term Report Topic Due.  Homework: LearnHTML, Working with Forms. 
April 24.  Designing Graphs, Charts and Web Sites. Object Linking and Embedding (OLE). Additional practice in creating WEB pages. Additional HTML exercises. Homework--Review this site: Web Style Guide:  Basic Design for Creating Web Sites (Lynch & Horton)-- http://info.med.yale.edu/caim/manual/Homework: LearnHTML, Working with Graphics.
Week 5
April 29. WWW--HTML and Home Page Design and Development.  Alternative sources of Web Page code and ideas. Using Color on Web Pages. Bring your home page ideas.  Term Project Complete Proposal Outline and Mindmap Due.
May 1. Designing Visible Visuals. Preparing Storyboards. Newsletter design. Review of Individual and Team Web Pages. Additional classwork on web pages, trademark and logotype development.Thoughts on Transactional Analysis (Read this page on the web prior to class.)Videotape--Transactional Analysis.  Mid-Term Examination of Web Page Progress.

Week 6
May 6. Advanced PowerPoint Techniques. In-class exercise. Presentation Techniques. Be Prepared to Speak--View videotape. Videotaping/CamCart.  Initial Electronic  Database Printouts Due. 
May 8.  Professor for a Day--Lois Hoyt, Daily Bulletin. Second E-Mail Due. 
Week 7
May 13.Review: The Language of the Report--Formal Language.  The Format of the Report. Format Guide for the Research Report.  Using PhotoShop on Scanned Pictures. Bring Pictures to Scan.Final Electronic Database Assignment Due. 
May 15.  Media Interviews. Videotape--Art of Exposing Yourself in Public Videotaping (CamCart). Additional work on individual and group web pages. 
Week 8
May 20. Additional work on graphics for website and finalizing  web oages. Using the Multimedia Lab. (See Business Project Grading Analysis) 

May 22. Job Interviews. Videotaping with CamCorder. Using PhotoShop and Manipulating Scanned Pictures. Bring Scanned Pictures. Finalize Work on Presentations and Binders.

Week 9
May 27. HOLIDAY--MEMORIAL DAY.
May 29. Present Term Project Findings. Term Project Due. 

Week 10
June 3. Present Term Project Findings. Deadline for All Work & BIPS. Binder Due. 
June 5. Third E-Mail Due. Review and Evaluation of Unit Binders.  



FINAL EXAM.
Section 1. Monday, June 10, 2002. 3:50 p.m. to 5:50 p.m. Room 6-122.

All Work, including bonus incentive points, must be turned in not later than the end of the June 3 class period to be counted toward the grade for this quarter. 




RECAP OF CLASS ACTIVITIES AND REQUIREMENTS


Have good attendance and actively participate in class exercises and discussions.
Complete the assignments and  master the required materials as evidenced by:


Improving knowledge and ability in the use of computer software--(e. g., web pages (HTML), presentation, word processing, drawing, desktop publishing, and group/collaborative writing applications.)  Applications of such software will be selected from:

Writing business letters and reports.
Learning HyperText Markup Language (HTML)
Newsletter design">Creating a newsletter, brochure, or announcement.
Creating World Wide Web Home Pages. Click here to see a slide with the minimum specific web pages to be included. 
Creating graphs (the visual display of quantitative information) for integration into letters, reports, or web pages.
Creating slide show presentations incorporating clip art and advanced techniques.

Creating documents using group-writing processes.
Learning and applying advanced uses of e-mail and Internet/Intranet.
Engaging in internet and library research on a management communication topic, preparing a report to post to web pages, and presenting the findings. Topics may be selected from (but not limited to) those such as the following:

Conducting Meetings and Conferences
Gender Communications-Writing and Interpersonal Concerns
Interviews--Performance Evaluation or Selection
Multicultural and/or Ethical Communication Considerations
Humans and Communication Technology
Communication and Conflict Resolution
Communication Styles for Effective Negotiation
Communicating Company Crises
Helping an actual company or unit within a company solve a specific communication problem.


Successfully preparing individual and group outside class assignments, to be placed in the Binder (also see summary below), including:

 Individual up-to-date resumes (also to be posted to your web site). 
 Individual assignments completed in class or for homework.
 Individual WEB page printouts and HTML files with floppy disk.

Term project and presentation materials for each individual and the group (identify creator of each item).  Each individual must also learn and apply basics of HTML and web-page design and prepare a home page for the World Wide Web that includes meaningful text and graphics. Each web page will be evaluated using a Web Page Evaluation Form.
 Work completed for Bonus Incentive Points (BIPS)



Term Project, Presentation, and Binder

Form your own "company" that will examine a significant problem in management communications (see list above for suggestions). The aim is to prepare materials that potential clients might use to get information which can be used to solve a significant management communication problem within their companies.
Create a unit identity, including: logo, letterhead, calling card, newsletter, flyer, and mission statement. Visit various websites on logo creation and design to learn more.
Do research from a variety of sources (with emphasis on the internet) to find answers to the problem.
Do research on a management communication topic. (Specifics to be given in class). A proposal is required. The formal vs. the informal writing style is to be used.  Any abstract used should follow the guidelines for preparing the abstract.
Provide evidence (printouts) of a variety of computer and internet database research sources on the management communication topic. (See Database Assignment.)
Web Pages. The materials collected and created will be put into a web site with company and individual pages. See the flowchart slide showing minimum required pages. See the main items required on team and individual home pages.
Conduct a management presentation on the topic including audio-visuals (color slide show, overheads, handouts, web pages or other appropriate media). This presentation is given to ACM, Inc. (the class), prior to being shown to the  "client" The class acts as a proxy for the client. If there is an actual company for whom the work is being done, they may be invited to the class presentation.
Include an experiential activity so the audience can apply the knowledge presented.
Include a problem-solving discussion of the lesson.
Complete the feedback process evaluating the lesson, including completion of the evaluation form.
Submit to the instructor appropriate question(s) for the final examination.
Prepare and submit the binder as outlined below (use dividers for each section). For more details, see the Binder Evaluation Form for more specifics. 



The Binder, described above, must include dividers for each main section and  contain the following summary of materials (final will not necessarily be in this order):

Letter of Transmittal.
Printed reports of research completed. 
Presentation materials (Storyboards, Powerpoint files, handouts) on the management communication topic.
Logo and associated unit identity documents.
Resume
Assignments of individuals--identified with names of the person completing the assignments.
Work completed for Bonus Incentives Points (BIPs) identified by individual.
WEB page (HTML) printouts.
Floppy disks with files of above documents (HTML, Powerpoint, etc).
Evidence of database research (printouts).





Expanded Outline of Course Content.  If you would like more detailed specifics about this course, please contact the instructor.


