

About Dan Waugh



About Dan Waugh
In order to evaluate the quality of the information on web pages, it is
helpful to know something about the source.  Here is Dan Waugh's resume primarily
insofar as it relates to his experience in and knowledge of matters Central Asian. 
Employment:  Associate Professor of History and
International Studies, University of Washington (Seattle)
Education:  B.A., Yale, 1963 (Physics); A.M., Harvard, 1965
(Regional Studies--Soviet Union); Ph.D., Harvard, 1972 (History; main field Medieval and
Early Modern Russia; field in Ottoman History)
Languages other than English:  fluent Russian; reading in German, French
and some other European languages; smattering of Turkic languages.
Relevant Travel:  
1969            Uzbekistan:
  Tashkent, Samarkand, Bukhara; Armenia; Georgia

1979            Tour lecturer
for Society Expeditions:  Uzbekistan--Tashkent, Samarkand, Khiva; Mongolia

1991            Kyrgyzstan:
  climb on Peak Lenin; Tajikistan:  hiking in Iagnob area; Uzbekistan:  
Tashkent, Samarkand, Shahr-i Sabs

1993            Caucasus:  
led climbs of Mt. Elbrus for REI Adventures; hiking in nearby mountains

1994            Expedition to
Gasherbrum II (8000 m. peak in Karakoram, Pakistan)

1995            Led trek for REI
in Pamir-Alai region of Kyrgyzstan; led REI mountain bike trip through Kyrgyzstan, across
the Torugart Pass to Kashgar, and down the Karakoram Highway to Gilgit in Pakistan.

1996            Led trek for REI
in Pamir-Alai region of Kyrgyzstan; solo trek in Kongur/Mustagh Ata region S. of Kashgar
in Xinjiang; climb of Mustagh Ata (24,750 ft.)

1998            China, including
month at Dunhuang studying Buddhist art at the Mogao caves

1999            Led trek for Mt.
Travel/Sobek in Pamir Alai region of Kyrgyzstan; also independent trekking there; climb on
Khan Tengri in Tien Shan

Courses Taught:  The Mongols; Russia and Asia; The Silk Road (to see
syllabus, click
here).
Publications and Research Projects:
Short notices/reviews of Soviet publications on Central Asia, in Middle East
Studies Association Bulletin, 17/2 (1983), 18/1 (1984), 19/1 and 19/2 (1985), 21/1
(1987).

"Is There
a Future for CD-ROMs?" REECAS Newsletter (Russian East European, and
Central Asian Studies Center, University of Washington), Fall, 1997. Includes review of The
Silk Road:  Digital Journey (DNA Multimedia, 1995).

"Exploring the 'Kongur Alps.'  Unknown Side of Mustagh Ata,"  The
Himalayan Journal, 54 (1998), pp. 25-32; four photographs.  Account of 1996 solo
trek in Kongur/Mustagh Ata region.

"In
the Footsteps of Xuanzang,"  REECAS Newsletter , Fall, 1998, pp. 1,
5-6.  Account of 1998 summer in China.

Co-editor (with M. Holt Ruffin), Civil Society in Central
Asia (Seattle:   University of Washington Press, 1999).  Papers from a
conference jointly sponsored by the Center for Civil Society International and the Johns
Hopkins Central Asia-Caucasus Institute; also, an annotated guide to Central Asian NGOs.

"Central
Asia After Eight Years of Independence,"REECAS Newsletter, Fall 1999,
pp. 1, 3-5. Note:  You need Adobe Acrobat 4.0 or higher to read this.  It can be
downloaded via a link to the REECAS site.

"The 'Mysterious and Terrible Karatash Gorges':  Notes and Documents on the
Explorations by Stein and Skrine," The Geographical Journal (Royal
Geographical Society), vol. 165, No. 3 (November 1999), pp. 306-320.  Juxtaposes
accounts by Aurel Stein and Clarmont Skrine with 1996 observations of Karatash River
region near Kongur and Mustagh Ata; includes 7 photographs. Uses unpublished material in
Bodleian Library (Oxford), the British Library Oriental and India Office Collections and
the photo archive of the Royal Geographic Society, London.

"The
Challenges of Learning about the Silk Road," REECAS Newsletter, Winter
2000.  Review of Susan Whitfield, Life along the Silk Road; Richard C.
Foltz, Religions of the Silk Road; Ian Gillman and Hans-Joachim Klimkeit,
Christians in Asia before 1500.

"The Pax Mongolica."
  A brief interpretation of the impact of the Mongol Empire.

Travelers on the Silk Road.
(Jointly authored with Adela Lee of the Silk-Road Foundation.)  An ongoing project to
provide basic reference material on history travel in Inner Asia.  to date, there are
some 45 entries.

A Sven Hedin Bibliography.  An extensive annotated bibliography of the writings of the famous Swedish explorer Sven Hedin and select works about him.
A brief Sven Hedin Chronology.

Review of Thomas T. Allsen, Commodity and exchange in the Mongol empire:  A
cultural history of Islamic textiles, forthcoming in Bulletin of the Royal
Institute for Inter-Faith Studies.

Photographs, published in several locations, including Cities/Buildings web
archive.  For further information, click here.

"The Making of Chinese Central Asia."  Unpublished conference
paper about C. P. Skrine's well-known 1926 book on western Xinjiang.

"Etherton at Kashgar:  Anti-Bolshevik Hero or Unprincipled Scoundrel?"
  Unpublished conference paper about Skrine's predecessor as British Consul in
Kashgar.

The two papers just listed are part of a current project, an book-length edition of C.
P. Skrine's unpublished correspondence and photographs, based on his materials in the
British Library Oriental and India Office Collections and the photographic archive of the
Royal Geographic Society.  Estimated completion date, 2002.

"Virtual and Visual Reality:  Cosmic Space in the Mogao Caves,"
unpublished paper (115 pp.)
---------------------------------------------
For a fuller academic CV including bibliography of my Russia-related publications, click here.
Last revised February 27, 2001.


