


Statecraft from Machiavelli to Kissinger and Beyond





Statecraft from Machiavelli to Kissinger and Beyond
MPP 660
Spring 1999

Gordon Lloyd
Office Location: SOL 103
Office Hours: Mon. & Weds 10:00 a.m. - noon
Tues. & Weds. 5: 00 p.m. - 6:00 p.m.
Phone: 310-317-7602 or 310-317-7691
Fax: 310-317-7494
E-mail: glloyd@pepperdine.edu
or gtlloyd@earthlink.net
MPP 660
Class Location: SR2
Class Time: Monday 1:00 p.m. - 5:00 p. m.
 
Purpose of Course
Our purpose is to examine the critical slices of modern history that
encompass dramatic challenges to the internal and international order of
political regimes. When new nations come into being, and established nations
go out of existence, when revolutions and wars occur, when leaders become
demagogues, then we have the opportunity to examine the greatness and the
frailty of statesmanship, diplomacy, and peace-keeping efforts. We focus
on the nineteenth and twentieth centuries because they fundamentally transformed
what Machiavelli referred to as "old modes and orders" and introduced the
novel phenomenon of modern mass democracy and modern totalitarianism. Within
this framework, we observe the revolutionary emergence of the nation-state
and, at the same time, the strongest challenge to the centrality of the
nation-state in the form of transnational appeals to class, race, and ethnicity.
We begin with Machiavelli, long recognized as the "founder" of the modern
nation-state, the main actor in the modern scheme of politics, and the
defender of the morality of necessity in relations among nations. We then
examine the French Revolutions of the nineteenth century and the totalitarian
movements of the left and right in the twentieth century. These revolutions
and movements have defined both domestic and international politics across
the globe. In addition to examining traditional original written and printed
material, we also examine the impact of the audio and visual media on the
conduct of international politics by such figures as Hitler, Churchill,
Roosevelt, Kissinger, Reagan, and Thatcher. This is particularly important
in the twentieth century because these new modes of communicating offer
the political leaders an unprecedented opportunity to influence the ordinary
citizen.
There are a set of questions that define the course. Why did the original
(1789) and subsequent (1848) revolutions occur and why did the promise
of political and economic freedom collapse into dictatorial rule and administrative
centralization? What made socialism and fascism so seductive to the academic
intelligentsia and political activists in the nineteenth and twentieth
centuries? Were these revolutions primarily on behalf of economic, political,
or religious freedom, and who opposed these demands for fundamental change
and why? On what grounds were the revolutions justified? To what extent
were the thoughts and deeds of the American Revolution on behalf of personal
liberty and constitutional democracy appealed to by the various sides in
the European theater over the last two centuries? Why did such "reflective
activists" as Edmund Burke, Alexis de Tocqueville, and Karl Marx consider
the 1789 Revolution to be unique and why did they think it contained the
secrets of future politics? What did Tocqueville think led to the election
of Napoleon as the first president of the French republic and what did
he do to protect liberty from revolutionary socialism and military dictatorship.
Why did all three choose the revolutions in France as their context for
discussing the fate of liberty in the modern world? Was the totalitarianism
of the twentieth century unique or can its origins be located in the heart
of the western tradition? In other words, was totalitarianism a derailment
or a fulfillment of "western values?" How do Churchill and Roosevelt
locate the twentieth-century crisis in terms of the larger picture of the
values of western civilization? How did Lenin, Hitler, and Stalin take
advantage of the modern sense of egalitarian justice to advance their cause?
Do you think that Hannah Arendt's thesis concerning Eichmann and the banality
of evil makes sense?
 
Course Requirements and Calendar
1. Attendance and Participation: 20%.
2. Conceptual Presentations: 40%.
Each participant can expect to deliver at least four conceptually-oriented
presentations on specifically assigned material. This material will include
regularly assigned readings as well as recommended material not listed
in the syllabus. This could well include reviews of audiotapes, videotapes,
and CD's. The overall purpose of these presentations is not to simply
describe a critical event or what an author, law, policy etc., states;
rather, the point is to inform and to interpret the material, stimulate
discussion, and to relate the assigned material to the larger goals of
the course. A brief outline of your remarks should be circulated to other
participants preferably one class meeting prior to delivery.
3. Research Paper: 40%.
Each participant shall choose a topic--cleared by me no later than 22
March--that addresses an important writer or public figure or critical
event concerning statecraft and diplomacy, or discusses an international
public policy issue of historical or contemporary importance. The paper
must be informed by the original literature covered in class and the literature
can include audiotapes, videotapes, and CD's. Put differently, the paper
must meet the following two tests: it could not have been written without
taking this class and yet it does not simply duplicate what is done in
class. The paper should be 12-14 pages in length, and conform to standards
appropriate for submission to a professional journal. A draft outline shall
be presented during the 5 April class session. The deadline for submission
of the final version of the paper is 5 pm on 12 April and no late papers
will be accepted. Please proof-read and spell-check your work.
4. Please consult the Academic Catalog for registration, withdrawal,
and other deadlines.
 
Required and Recommended* Reading Available for Purchase in the Bookstore
Niccolo Machiavelli, The Art of War (Da Capo)
Niccolo Machiavelli, The Prince (Bantam)
Edmund Burke, Reflections on the Revolution in France (Regnery)
Alexis de Toqueville, The Old Regime (Anchor)
Alexis de Toqueville, Recollections (Transaction)
Robert Tucker, Marx-Engels Reader (Norton)
V.I. Lenin, State and Revolution (Penguin)
Hannah Arendt, Origins of Totalitarianism (Harcourt Brace) Recommended*
Hannah Arendt, Eichmann in Jerusalem (Penguin)
Alan Bullock, Hitler and Stalin (Vintage) Recommended*
Adolph Hitler, Mein Kampf (Houghton Mifflin)
Martin Gilbert, Churchill (Holtamol)
 


Audio and Visual and Print Library
Consult the growing collection of material available in the library
of the School of Public Policy.


Weekly Outline
Week 1 Being Crafty, Being Naughty, Being Bold, Being Virtuous,
and Being Right
The Melian Dialogue: International Relations and the Facts of
Life
Pericles's Funeral Oration : Domestic Politics and the Facts
of Death
Lincoln in Life and Death: Reflections by Elihu Root and Karl Marx
Recommended Listening: Margaret Thatcher, Downing Street Years
Weeks 2 & 3 The Machiavellian Formula: Helping Friends
and Harming Enemies
The Prince: The Creation of Regimes and the Preparation
for War (Two Assignments)
The Art of War: Military History and Political Necessity (Seven
Assignments)
Neal Wood's Introduction (Two Assignments)
Recommended Viewing: A&E Biography of Henry Kissinger
Weeks 4 & 5 The French Revolution of 1789: Burke's
Warning about "Absolute Politics"
Reflections on the Revolution in France: "manifesto of
a counter revolution" (Eight Assignments)
Chronology of a Crisis (Three Assignments)
Recommended Viewing: A&E Biography on Mahatma Gandhi
Week 6 The French Revolution of 1789: Toqueville's Affection
for Decentralization
A. Ancien Regime, I & II: "Why did the storm...break in France?"
(Six assignments)
B. Ancien Regime, III: Was the revolution a "foregone conclusion?"
(Five Assignments)
Recommended Viewing: A&E Biography of Eleanor Roosevelt
Week 7 The French Revolution of 1848: Tocqueville on the
absence of Statesmanship
Recollections: the "social question" had come to predominate
French politics
Parts I & II (Five Assignments), Part III (Five Assignments) and
Author's Introduction (One Assignment)
Recommended Viewing: A&E Biography of Disraeli
Recommended Listening: Ronald Reagan, The Great Speeches, Vol. I
Weeks 8 & 9 Marx, Engels, and Lenin: Class Struggle
and the End of History
Revolutionary Program and Strategy: overturn private property
Society and Politics: the forging of alliances
The Later Engels: dialectical materialism explained
Lenin's State and Revolution: when to fight and when to negotiate
(Twenty-two Assignments)
Recommended Viewing: A&E Biography of V. I. Lenin
Recommended Listening: Ronald Reagan, The Great Speeches, Vol. II
Weeks 10 & 11 Hitler and Fascist Totalitarianism: Machiavelli
in the Twentieth Century?
Hitler's Mein Kampf: "there is no such thing as principles of
foreign policy"
Speeches of Adolf Hitler--video
Hannah Arendt's Eichmann in Jerusalem: "the banality of evil"
Trial of Adolf Eichmann--video (Eleven Assignments)
Recommended Viewing: A&E Biography of Joseph Stalin
Recommended Listening: FDR, Nothing To Fear
Weeks 12 & 13 Churchill: the Retrieval of Statesmanship
Martin Gilbert's Churchill A Life
Speeches of Winston Churchill--video
Churchill in His Own Voice--audio (Eleven Assignments)
Recommended Viewing: A&E Biography of Winston Churchill
Week14 Draft Presentations of Research Papers
Week15 Submission of Research Papers


