


Syllabus for HY 390 -- Hitler & Nazi Germany




This page best viewed with a graphical browser such as Netscape
or MS Internet Explorer


University of South Alabama
History 390
Fall 1997
Dr. Daniel E. Rogers
http://www.usouthal.edu/usa/history/faculty/rogers
Office: HUMB 344
Office Hours: M&W 2-4; T&Th 12-1
Office Phone: 460-6210 (receptionist); 460-7610 (in my office)
Home Phone: 633-2429
E-mail: drogers@jaguar1.usouthal.edu


HITLER & NAZI GERMANY
The contemporary world has been profoundly affected by the shock waves
that emanated from Nazi Germany earlier this century. There are few countries,
and few individuals, whose lives have not been transformed by the attempt
of Adolf Hitler and Germany to conquer much of the world during the Second
World War. The process by which Hitler's regime came to power and its ruling
philosophy also reveal much about the transformation of the modern world
over the last two hundred years. A good understanding of Nazi Germany and
Hitler's rise to power will therefore be of prime importance to anyone
seeking to understand how the world came to its present state. 
This course introduces students to the rise of Adolf Hitler as dictator
of Nazi Germany and to the Nazi era from 1933 to 1945. Topics to be covered
include the origins of Germanic and National Socialist ideologies; the
political history of Germany before, during, and after the First World
War; the life of Hitler; the collapse of the Weimar Republic (Germany's
democratic, liberal government); the Nazi takeover of power; the Nazi revolution
after power; the Nazi "synchronization" (Gleichschaltung)
of all facets of German life to the goals of the party; everyday life during
the Nazi era; the advent of the Second World War; German resistance to
Nazism; the war itself and the German home front; and the Holocaust. This
course will consist of (1) class time, which will involve lectures, discussions,
and video presentations and (2) reading and note-taking you will do outside
of class. You should expect to spend at least two hours preparing outside
of class for every one hour in class. 
The choice of material presented in the course presupposes students
have satisfactorily completed the second half of the Western civilization
survey (History 102). Students who have not completed History 102 may be
at a disadvantage and may need to do further reading at the beginning of
the course
Office Hours: My office hours and office location are listed
above. Please come by to chat any time you'd like -- about any subject
you'd like -- even if you don't think it directly relates to our class.
If my office hours are not convenient for you, you may call me at one of
the phone numbers listed above, or you may e-mail me (I generally respond
to e-mail within a few hours, unless I am traveling). We can also make
an appointment for a meeting time convenient for us both. 
I will always be glad to see you or hear from you. In particular, don't
hesitate to phone (but not after 10:00 pm). If by some odd chance it is
not a good time for me to talk, I will call you back at a time that is
convenient for both of us. Please be ready to leave a message, with a phone
number where I can reach you, in case you call and I am not in.
Books: The required readings for the class are: 

Jay Baird, To Die for Germany
Omer Bartov, Hitler's Army
Eberhard Jäckel, Hitler's World View
Donald B. Wall, Nazi Germany and World War II

Your grade for the class will be determined by the following percentages:




2 quizzes @ 20% each
In-class midterm essay
Final exam (comprehensive, with both short and essay answers)
Class participation


40%
20%
30%
10%


The standard grading scale will be used (A=90-100; B=80-89.99; C=70-79.99;
D=60-69.99; F=below 60). No extra-credit assignments are possible. No curve
or other alteration of the standard scale will be used
Quiz, Essay, and Exam Formats: Quizzes will consist largely of
multiple-choice and/or other very short answers, and will test knowledge
of both class materials and readings. The in-class midterm essay will cover
specific areas announced in advance and will allow you to use notes. The
final exam will be a mix of formats: there will be a section like those
on the quizzes in which you will answer very briefly without the benefit
of notes; and there will be an essay portion during which you may use your
notes. Precise instructions on which notes may be used will be given in
class, so pay attention.
Class Participation and Attendance: Your attendance is mandatory.
Roll will be taken daily. There will be no penalty for the first four classes
missed, but the fifth and sixth absences will each deduct five points from
your class participation grade. If you miss more than six classes, you
may be failed for the course. If you have a medical or other emergency
situation that prevents your attendance in class, you should document it
and hold onto that proof. The fifth, sixth, and any subsequent absences,
even if for legitimately excusable reasons, will not be excused unless
proof of legitimate excuses for the first four absences is also provided.
But there is no need to present proof of the reasons for your absences
until you have missed at least five classes. Missing the first day of class
counts as much as any other class day, and may only be excused for a legitimate
emergency as mentioned in the preceding paragraph. Class participation
grades will be determined largely by your attendance and by your willingness
to participate when questions are posed to the class. Perfect attendance
and a willingness to deal with questions in class will result in full credit
for class participation. 
Make-up Policy: The quizzes, midterm in-class essay, and final
exams will not be excused without documented proof of an emergency medical
condition or other emergency situation that prevents your attendance at
the time scheduled. Not being prepared for the quiz, essay, or exam is
not a sufficient reason to miss. If a quiz or essay is missed, any make-up
will be given at a time chosen by the professor after consultation with
all students affected. Any make-up may be unintentionally more difficult
and less fair than the exercise done in class, simply because less time
can be devoted to drafting it. The format of any make-up quizzes may also
change, from a short-answer format to an entirely essay one.
Honesty: All work in this class must be your own. You must neither
seek improper assistance from, nor offer improper assistance to, any student
in this class. For the quizzes, you may use only the knowledge you bring
with you in your own mind, and may not use any notes or other aids, nor
may you in any way assist or seek assistance from another student once
the quiz has begun. For the midterm in-class essay, you may use only such
notes as you yourself have either written by hand or typed (all typed notes
must be approved in advance by the professor), and you may not in any way
assist another student, or seek assistance from another student, once the
essay writing has begun. For the final, you may use your own notes only
on the essay portion, and you may not assist any other students, nor seek
assistance from any other students, once the final has begun. 
Any deviation from these standards of honesty may result in grade penalties
up to and including the grade of F for the entire course. If you ever have
any doubts about the propriety of any academic conduct, for this class
or any other, please contact me in advance at one of the phone numbers
above; I will always be glad to hear from you.
Quiz, Essay, and Exam Schedule
Quiz One: Monday, October 13. You will be responsible for all
class and reading material up to this point, and for Jäckel's Hitler's
World View. 
Midterm In-Class Essay: Thursday, October 23. You will be given
written guidance on the areas to be covered by the essay questions. You
may use notes as specified above. 
Quiz Two: Thursday, November 6. You will be responsible for all
class and reading material since the first quiz, and for Baird's To Die
for Germany. 
Final Exam: Wednesday, December 3, 12 noon. You will be responsible
for all class and reading material since the second quiz and for Bartov's
Hitler's Army, and you will be given written guidance on the areas to be
covered by the essay questions. You may use notes for the essay questions
as specified above.
Class Topics and Textbook Reading Assignments
1. The Burden of German History, 1648-1918 (Wall, 1-8; 11-20) 
2. Romanticism and Germanic Ideology 
3. The Life of Adolf Hitler Prior to Politics, 1889-1919 (Wall, 8-11) 
4. The Weimar Republic and the Nazi Movement, 1919-1924 (Wall, 22-36)
Quiz One on all material above, plus Jäckel's book

5. The Nazi Movement, 1924-1933 (Wall, 36-40; 42-62) 
6. The Nazi Takeover in 1933 and Revolution after Power, 1933-1945: Gleichschaltung
(Wall, 64-86) 
7. Culture and Society: Women, Youth, Church, Propaganda, Art (Wall, 89-110)
Quiz Two on material since first quiz, plus Baird's book

8. Nazi Foreign Policy (Wall, 113-131)
9. The Nazi War (Wall, 133-174; reading recommended, but not required)
10. The Home Front and Resistance (Wall, 176-194)
11. Antisemitism and the Holocaust (Wall, 197-220)
12. The End of the Reich (224-245; reading recommended, but not required)
Final Exam with essay on announced topics, and including
quiz on all material since second quiz and Bartov's book
Professor
Rogers' Home Page | USA History Department Home 
Page


