


Vast and vulnerable networks



You may return to the course syllabus or to the class sessions page.

Vast and vulnerable networks
An overview of the economic, political, and information networks into which
Iberian peoples and officials had inserted themselves and an analysis of the
opportunities and difficulties inherent in such global activities.  Special
attention to the pull of its "periphery" on Portugal.

Reading:  Bakewell, pp. 210-215, 296-297, and ch. 13 to p. 338; Russell-Wood,
ch. IV.


In what ways did the exchange of plants, animals, and peoples between the
Americas and Afroeurasia in the late fifteenth and the sixteenth centuries
affect the social and cultural environments of Europeans, Asians, Africans,
and American Indians?
Why did an active silver trade develop between Mexico and Manila?
Why were Roman Catholics generally more successful than Protestants in
converting non-Europeans between the sixteenth and eighteenth centuries?
Why, despite intense missionary efforts by Christians, was Islam the most
rapidly expanding religion in Afroeurasia between 1500 and 1800 (and in terms
of numbers of converts, in the world during this period)?
What was required to mine, process, and transport American silver?
Why were the systems of mine labor different in Mexico and Peru?
What were the environmental consequences of the tremendous expansion of
silver production in Mexico and Peru?
What accounts for the centrality of mining and sugar production in the
economic importance of the Americas to Europe?
What factors led to significant increases in European demand for sugar?
If official corruption was so widespread, as is often claimed, how was it
possible for the Castilian government to organize huge administrative
enterprises like the Atlantic fleet system or the expulsion of the Moriscos?
Why did the Castilian and Portuguese governments so often encourage
monopoly practices in production and trade?
What was the impact on Castilian and Portuguese territories of the taxes
needed to maintain Habsburg political and military commitments?
Why didn't the Castilian and Portuguese royal governments collect their
taxes directly?
Why didn't the Castilian and Portuguese royal governments pay more
attention to the economic impact of their fiscal policies?
Why did the government of the Portuguese ruler João (John) III give
ever greater attention to Brazilian developments?
Why did the English have to resort to the weak strategy of pirate attacks
on the Habsburgs' American dominions?
Why did so much of the defensive military organization in Castilian and
Portuguese America have to be undertaken by local groups?  Why didn't such
fragmented military leadership lead to the loss by Castilian and Portugal of
their American dominions?
Why was the price of African slaves climbing in the seventeenth century
when the cost of many of other products was stagnant or declining?
What factors led to the financial crisis of the final years of the reign
of king João III (r. 1521-1557) of Portugal?
What impact did the developing Catholic Reformation have on the social and
cultural environments of European Portugal?  What impact did this religious
reform movement have on Portuguese territories in East Africa and Asia?
What impact did the activities of Inquisition tribunals have on the social
and cultural environments of Portugal?
Why did the Society of Jesus (the Jesuits), one of the best-known products
of the Catholic Reformation, develop a policy of toleration for Christians of
Jewish origin, in the face of a good bit of Iberian official and popular
hostility toward them?
Why were political and military developments in Morocco of importance to
the Portuguese Crown?
The Portuguese Crown in the mid sixteenth century faced problems on three
international fronts.  Why did the Crown not have adequate resources to act on
all these fronts at the same time?
Why did the Portuguese Crown increasingly withdraw from direct trading
activities?
Why would the Portuguese in South India act in ways that would stimulate
the hostility of Hindus and Mappila Muslims?
Why did the viceroy Dom João de Castro fail in his mid
sixteenth-century efforts at military reform in Portuguese India?
Why was the Portuguese carreira system chronically short of ships?
In light of the Ming government's prohibition of overseas trade, why were
Portuguese merchants and officials interested in southeastern China?
Why would Portuguese traders become involved with the Wako of the South
China Sea?
Why were Jesuit missionaries able to gain a relatively open entrance to
Japan in the mid sixteenth century?
Why did trade with Japan take on such a great importance within overall
Portuguese activity in Asia in the second half of the sixteenth century?
Why did expansion of Portuguese activity and territorial control virtually
cease after 1570?
What factors created opportunities for the Portuguese in Burma?
Why would the Portuguese have been particularly concerned about the
Sultanate of Aceh (Atjah)?
Why was there such a great demand for Indian textiles as far away as West
Africa and eastern Indonesia?  How were Indian producers able to supply such a
vast market?


Mail questions now.  Please include your
name and e-mail address in the body of your message.




All contents copyright © 1995-99.
J. B. Owens
All rights reserved.

Revised:  28 July 1999

URL:  http://www.isu.edu/~owenjack/spemp/reading.21.html



