
Slavery and Society in Ancient Rome


Slavery and Society in Ancient Rome
Syllabus


CLST 376 
(x-list ANCH 376 and HIST 376)

Instructor: Brent D. Shaw
Place: Logan Hall 392
E-Mail: bshaw@sas.upenn.edu
Fall 2001
Time: Tues-Thurs: 10:30-12:00



Course Description
Textbooks
Course Requirements
Provisional Schedule of Classes
Books on Reserve

Course Description

From the perspective of our modern world, we look upon the ownership of
human beings as an odd practice and certainly as an evil one. But
the sad fact is that the domination and control of human beings for
whatever purposes the owners might wish has been a rather widespread
practice in most societies 
in the world's history. In this course we shall be looking at one 
of the few societies that is justifiably categorized as a 'slave 
society' in the sense that its economic, social, and even 
political institutions were critically shaped by the institution 
of slavery: the society of imperial Rome. In order to understand 
the background to the development of slavery in the Roman world,
we shall first consider the development of the unusual 
type of slavery (usually labelled 'chattel' slavery) that was typical of
Roman society -- a system in which the slave was treated as a commercial
commodity. We shall trace the origins of this peculiar type of slavery in
the world of the Greek city states, whose economic and political
development preceded that of Rome by a number of centuries. Consideration
of the historical case of slavery in the Greek world will provide us with
a base-line against which to compare the development of slavery in the
Roman empire. 

Even in a limited and well-defined social and historical context such as
that of the Roman empire, however, the institution of slavery was so
complex that we will only be able to 'scratch the surface' in our 
understanding of it. The instructor will attempt to give as even 
a coverage as possible to the major aspects of slavery during the 
time of the Roman empire. The main themes of Roman slavery with which
this course will concern itself are: the development of
the slave system, how the system was maintained, and the problems faced by
a society and a state that depended on chattel slaves for its wealth and
power. We shall also attempt to understand the ways in which the holding
of slaves affected values and attitudes in this world -- including those
of slaves who rejected their status and resisted it in many different
forms, including outright warfare. Finally, we shall try to understand
how and why the system of chattel slavery changed during the transition
from the Roman empire to the kingdoms of the early mediaeval period in
western Europe.

As the instructor will repeatedly emphasize, a huge absence
in the records from Roman times is the almost complete lack of 
testimony from the slaves themselves. This is a critical void in the
evidence that must always be borne in mind when we are considering any
of the claims made by modern-day historians about slavery
in this period. 


Textbooks
Reader 

Thomas Wiedemann, Greek and Roman Slavery, London-New York, 
Routledge, 1994 (paperback) 

Texts

Keith Bradley, Slavery and Society at Rome, Cambridge,
Cambridge University Press, 1994 (paperback) 

Peter Garnsey, Ideas of Slavery from Aristotle to
Augustine, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1996 (paperback) 

Orlando Patterson, Slavery and Social Death: A Comparative
Study, Cambridge, Mass., Harvard University Press, 1983 (paperback) 

Brent D. Shaw (translation and introduction), Spartacus and the Slave
Wars, New York, St. Martin's Press, 2001


Important Supplementary Website for this Course
The following site contains the assigned readings for the course,
supplementary bibliographies that can be used in connection with writing
your essays, and some of the illustrations used in connection with
the lectures
 

Assigned
readings, supplementary bibliographies, and illustrations


Important Websites on the History of Slavery


Slave
Narratives:
Texts of primary source documents including important slave narratives
from the ante-bellum South

More Slave
Narratives:
More autobiographical accounts of the lives of slaves in the
ante-bellum
South; part of a large on-line data base that is being compiled on the
history of the Old South

The Nottingham
Centre for the History of Slavery: a site that targets new
research specifically on slavery on Greek and Roman antiquity, as well as
on other historical epochs.



Course Requirements
1. Research Paper (30%)

(a) One requirement for completion of the class (in addition to 
the examinations, see below) is the submission of a written 
research paper. To begin, you should choose a specific aspect of 
slavery on which you would wish to pursue some independent 
research. Since there are aspects of slavery in the Roman world 
which, though very important, are not very well documented, you 
should clear your idea/choice of subject with the instructor as 
soon as possible. The instructor will then assist you with some bibliography
and suggest some ways in which you might 
begin your research. 

(b) Since slavery is a social institution that transcends the 
precise Roman case that we shall be considering, one important
way of pursuing an historical analysis is to consider the main 
characteristics of Roman slavery when they are compared 
with other slave systems known in the world's history. In order 
to understand aspects of slavery that were peculiar to Roman society,
perhaps the best tactic is to use the method of comparative history. Take
the particular subject that you have selected to investigate on 
slavery in the Roman world (e.g., slave rebellions and wars, 
slave labor, female slaves, servile status, family life, freedmen, 
religion, latifundist or plantation agriculture, philosophies 
or justifications of slavery,or the slave trade) and take one good 
comparative case from another slave system in world history. Try 
to show what the main similarities and differences are between 
the Roman case and the comparative case that you have selected. 
Your textbook Slavery and Social Death by Orlando Patterson 
should be helpful here, since Patterson is attempting to discover 
the basic general characteristics that were common to  many 
different slave systems. Finally, you should try to give some 
explanations about why the two systems you are considering (the 
Roman one and the case that you are using for comparison) exhibit 
important differences. 



Advice
on Writing the Term Paper:
2. Midterm Examination (30%): 
A midterm examination will be set 
according to the schedule below. Details concerning the format and
coverage will be explained in class. 

3. Final Examination (40%): 
A final examination will be set 
during Final Examination Period. As with the midterm 
examination, details concerning the format will be 
explained in class. 




Provisional Schedule of Classes


The following outline is provisional. Since the class will proceed
at a
pace that will take into account various problems and questions raised by
the subject matter, the running order of subjects will be modified as
necessary. 



Thurs. Sept. 6:Introduction



Tues. Sept. 11:Thurs. Sept. 12:The Greek City States:
Origins of Chattel SlaveryThe Greek City States: the World of
the Slaves



Tues. Sept. 18:Thurs. Sept. 20:
The Greek City States: Ideas and Ideology
Hellenistic Systems of Servitude



Tues. Sept. 25:Thurs. Sept. 27:
Rome: The Origins of Large-Scale SlaveryWays of Becoming a Slave



Tues. Oct. 2:Thurs. Oct. 4:
Rome and the Slave TradeBecoming Free: Roman Manumission


Tues. Oct. 9:Thurs. Oct. 11:

Freedmen and the Urban EconomyRural Servitude: Latifundist
Agriculture



Tues. Oct. 16:Thurs. Oct. 18:
Resisting Slavery: the Sicilian Slave WarsMIDTERM
EXAMINATION


Tues. Oct. 23:Thurs. Oct. 25:

Resisting Slavery: SpartacusResisting Slavery: Spartacus



Tues. Oct. 30:Thurs. Nov. 1:
Slavery: Ordinary Resistance
Dangerous Slaves; Slaves and Politics



Tues. Nov. 6:Thurs. Nov. 8:

Slaves and the Law/PunishmentThe Familia Urbana



Tues. Nov. 13:Thurs. Nov. 15:
Running the Empire: the Emperor's Slaves
Images of Freedmen: Trimalchio



Tues. Nov. 20:Thurs. Nov. 22:
Images and Beliefs/TERM PAPERS DUE
THANKSGIVING



Tues. Nov. 27Thurs. Nov. 29
Realities: Family and Sexuality
Transformation: Slavery in the Provinces



Tues. Dec. 4:Thurs. Dec. 6:
Transformation: Christianity and Slavery
Transformation: Late Antiquity and Feudal Europe




Books on Reserve (Rosengarten Library: Van Pelt
Library)

The following books have been placed on day reserve. They are 
fundamental and commonly used books, and should therefore be available to 
all students in the class on a regular basis. Reference will be made to
them under the heading 'supplementary readings' on the textbook readings
handout out in class.




Roman Slavery:


M. I. Finley, Ancient Slavery and Modern Ideology, Harmondsworth,
Penguin, 1980

Keith R. Bradley, Slaves and Masters in the Roman Empire: A
Study in Social Control, New York-Oxford, Oxford University Press,
1987 
Keith R. Bradley,  Slavery and Rebellion in the Roman World, 140 B.C. -
70 B.C., Bloomington, Ind.-London, Indiana University Press, 1989 

Yvon Garlan, Slavery in Ancient Greece, Ithaca NY, Cornell
University Press, 1988

Alan Watson, Roman Slave Law, Baltimore, Johns Hopkins
University Press, 1987

William L. Westermann, The Slave Systems of Greek and Roman
Antiquity, Philadelphia, 1955 




Comparative Slavery:

Mary Karasch, Slave Life in Rio de Janeiro, 1808-1850, Princeton,
Princeton University Press, 1987

Herbert Klein, African Slavery in Latin America and the
Caribbean, New York, Oxford University Press, 1985

Peter Kolchin, Unfree Labor: American Slavery and Russian
Serfdom, Cambridge-London, Harvard University Press, 1987 

Peter Kolchin, American Slavery, 1617-1877, New York, Hill & Wang,
1993

James Mellon ed., Bullwhip Days: The Slaves Remember: An Oral 
History, New York, Oxford University Press, 1988 



