









Pace--The Old South Syllabus, Spring 2000


<!--
 /* Style Definitions */
p.MsoNormal, li.MsoNormal, div.MsoNormal
	{mso-style-parent:"";
	margin:0in;
	margin-bottom:.0001pt;
	mso-pagination:widow-orphan;
	font-size:12.0pt;
	font-family:"Times New Roman";
	mso-fareast-font-family:"Times New Roman";
	color:#333333;}
h3
	{margin-right:0in;
	mso-margin-top-alt:auto;
	mso-margin-bottom-alt:auto;
	margin-left:0in;
	mso-pagination:widow-orphan;
	mso-outline-level:3;
	font-size:13.5pt;
	font-family:"Times New Roman";
	color:#333333;
	font-weight:bold;}
a:link, span.MsoHyperlink
	{color:blue;
	text-decoration:underline;
	text-underline:single;}
a:visited, span.MsoHyperlinkFollowed
	{color:#FF3333;
	text-decoration:underline;
	text-underline:single;}
p
	{margin-right:0in;
	mso-margin-top-alt:auto;
	mso-margin-bottom-alt:auto;
	margin-left:0in;
	mso-pagination:widow-orphan;
	font-size:12.0pt;
	font-family:"Times New Roman";
	mso-fareast-font-family:"Times New Roman";
	color:#333333;}
@page Section1
	{size:8.5in 11.0in;
	margin:1.0in 1.25in 1.0in 1.25in;
	mso-header-margin:.5in;
	mso-footer-margin:.5in;
	mso-paper-source:0;}
div.Section1
	{page:Section1;}
 /* List Definitions */
@list l0
	{mso-list-id:2087723650;
	mso-list-type:hybrid;
	mso-list-template-ids:765113796 -1011822546 465630802 903645094 1335124628 803894838 -1785794230 1384301680 -1301278096 -1583292268;}
@list l0:level1
	{mso-level-number-format:bullet;
	mso-level-text:\F0B7;
	mso-level-tab-stop:.5in;
	mso-level-number-position:left;
	text-indent:-.25in;
	mso-ansi-font-size:10.0pt;
	font-family:Symbol;}
ol
	{margin-bottom:0in;}
ul
	{margin-bottom:0in;}
-->






History 4320 
The Old South 
 Spring 2002

Instructor:  Dr. Robert
F. Pace 
Office Hours:  MWF 9-10; TR 10:30-11:30; OR BY APPOINTMENT 
Office:  Old Main 205 
Office Phone: 793-3865 
e-mail: pacer@mcmurryadm.mcm.edu



Contents



Course Description


Required Texts


Course Objectives




Class Schedule


Course Requirements


Grading




Attendance Policy


Make-up Policy


Debates 




Note on
  Materials to be Turned In


Web Page Project


Academic Honesty




Persuasive
  Speech Instructions


Back to Dr. Pace's
  Page



OPPOSING VIEWPOINTS IN SOUTHERN
HISTORY WEB PROJECT 



Course Description:
A study of the southern distinctiveness from colonial times
to 1865, including an examination of the plantation system, race, slavery,
religion, gender, Native Americans, cultural continuity, and geographical
dimensions.  Themes include the growth of southern nationalism, social
history, and a discussion of the origins of a distinctive South. 
Back to Table of Contents 



Required Texts:

William J. Cooper and Thomas
     Terrill, The American South: A History (3rd Edition) VOLUME
     I.
John B. Boles, Black
     Southerners, 1619-1869.
Charles C. Bolton and Scott
     P. Culclasure, eds. The Confessions of Edward Isham:  A Poor White
     Life in the South.
Frederaick Law Olmsted, The
     Cotton South.

Back to Table of Contents 



Course Objectives:
1. To build an understanding of the people, ideas, culture,
economy, and customs that collectively made the antebellum South a unique
region in our country's history. 
2. To be able to communicate effectively thoughts and ideas about the Old
South in both written and oral formats. 
3. To be able to use different forms of historical information, apply
critical analysis to this information, and show evidence of this analytical
ability in both written exams, oral presentations, and through web-page design.

Back to Table of Contents 



Course Schedule:
Week 1 (January 14-19): 
Assignment: Cooper/Terrill, Prologue, Map Essay, Ch. 1; Olmsted, Ch. 1
Week 2 (January 21-25): 
Assignment: Cooper/Terrill, Chs. 2-4; Olmsted, Ch. 2
Week 3 (January 28-February 1): 
Assignment: Link., Chs. 5-7; Olmsted, Ch. 3
    DEBATE TOPIC: 
 Which best defined the Old
South, immigration settlement patterns or geography? (A vs. B)
Week 4 (February 4-8): 
Assignment:  Cooper/Terrill, Chs. 10-11; Olmsted, Ch. 4-5 
    DEBATE TOPIC:  Which crop was more important to the
antebellum South, cotton or corn? (C vs. D)
Week 5 (February 11-15): 
Assignment: Olmsted, Ch. 6-7; 
    DEBATE TOPIC:  Which crop was more important to the
antebellum South, tobacco, sugarcane, or rice? (A vs. B vs.C)
Week 6 (February 18-22) 
Assignment: Olmsted, Ch. 8-9; Web Page Critique 
    DEBATE TOPIC:  Was slavery really a profitable
institution?  (A vs. C)
Week 7 (February 25-March 1): 
Assignment: Web Page Critique 
   DEBATE TOPIC: Who was
more zealous:  defenders of slavery or abolitionists? (B vs. D)
 Week 8 (March 4-8): 
Assignment:  Review all reading assigned weeks 1-7 
MONDAY (3/4): REVIEW FOR MIDTERM 
WEDNESDAY (3/6): MIDTERM PT. I 
FRIDAY (3/8): MIDTERM PT. II 
SPRING BREAK (MARCH 11-15) 
Week 9 (March 18-22): 
Assignment:  Read Cooper/Terrill, Ch. 12; Black Southerners (all);
Web Page Critique 
DEBATE TOPIC:  Was southern hospitality truly “hospitable?” (A vs.
D)
Week 10 (March 25-29): NOTE: NO CLASS ON FRIDAY (3/29)--EASTER
HOLIDAY
Assignment: Continue Black Southerners; Web Page Critique
Week 11 (April 1-5): NOTE: NO CLASS ON MONDAY (4/1)--EASTER
HOLIDAY
Assignment:  Finish Black Southerners; Begin Confessions of
Edward Isham 
    DEBATE TOPIC:  Was Southern honor truly
"honorable?" (B vs. C)
Week 12 (April 8-12): 
Assignment:  Continue Confessions of Edward Isham 


Week 13 (April 15-19): 
Assignment:  Continue Confessions of Edward Isham; Web Page
Critique 
DEBATE TOPIC: What best defined Southern society--culture or environment?
 (A vs. B)
Week 14 : (April 22-26):  
Assignment: Finish Confessions of Edward Isham Web Page Critique 
DEBATE TOPIC:  Is the culture
of modern-day West Texas better defined as “Southern” or “Western”? (C vs. D)
Week 15 (April 29-May 3): 
Assignment: Web Page Critique 
DEBATE TOPIC: Additional topic will be added if necessary). 
Week 16  (May 6): 
Assignment: Monday (5/6): Review for Final; Web Page Critique (if necessary) 
Return to Table of Contents 



Course Requirements:
Midterm: March 6 and 8 
Reading reviews and discussion 
In-Class debates 
Web page creation 
Final Examination 
***Note that these assignments are required as part of your passing
this class.  Failure to complete any of these assignments will result in
automatic failure, regardless of your overall average. 
Return to Table of Contents 



Grading:
Your final grade in the course will be determined as
follows: 
  



Attendance


50 points




Midterm 


200 points 




Persuasive Speech


200 points




Participation 


100 points 




Web Page
  Project 


 200 points 




Final Exam 


250 points 



The following grading scale will be observed for the semester:  



930-1000


A  




900-929


A-




880-899


B+




830-879


B




800-829


B-




780-799


C+




730-779


C




700-729


C-




680-699


D+




630-679


D




600-629


D-



Return to Table of Contents 



Attendance Policy:
Attendance in the class is REQUIRED.  Because much of
the information in this class comes from lectures, absences will place the student
significantly behind, therefore, attendance records will be kept.  If a
student arrives after roll is taken, it is the student's responsibility
to make sure his or her presence has been recorded AT THE END OF THAT DAY'S
CLASS.  Only official University absences are recognized as
excused. Unexcused students missing tests can not take a make-up.  If a
student has more than three (3) unexcused absences, he or she will receive a
"0" on the attendance grade.  IT IS THE STUDENT'S RESPONSIBILITY
TO KEEP TRACK OF ALL DOCUMENTATION OF EXCUSED ABSENCES AND TO BE ABLE TO
PRODUCE THEM FOR THE INSTRUCTOR UPON REQUEST. 
 
Unexcused absences on debate days will also result in a
lowering of the student’s participation grade.
 
Return to Table of Contents 



Make-up Policy
Make-up exams will be administered only when students can
show a valid reason for their absence (this means confirmation from either a
doctor or from the dean).  Students must schedule the make-up exam with
the instructor within one week of the original exam.  Failure to
make such arrangements will result in failure of the course. 
Back to Table of Contents 



DEBATES:
    In southern colleges during the
antebellum period, students gained a large portion of their educations with
Literary Debating Societies.  Almost every southern college had at least
two of these societies organized and run completely by the students. 
These societies had weekly meetings lasting from two to four hours each. 
At each meeting a topic was chosen for debate and at least one student was
selected to argue the "pro" and another to argue the
"con."  With this method of learning, educated southern men
became especially adept at making strong arguments to support their positions
in places of power like state legislatures and the US Congress.  It has
been said often that more education took place in these literary societies than
in the classroom in southern colleges. 
    This semester, we are going to attempt a facsimile of
this old educational tradition in our classroom.  First we will divide the
class into three to four societies.  During several weeks of the semester,
there will be a question open for debate and every student will take one turn
during the semester representing their society in arguing the question. 
On Fridays of a debate week, the class time will be set aside for two students,
previously selected, to argue the major points of the question, one student
taking the pro, the other taking the con (click here
to see persuasive speech instructions ).  The instructor will decide
which student takes which side of the argument.  Each student will make a
five- to ten-minute presentation based on research he or she has done on the
topic (I have articles and article suggestions for all of these topics, so come
see me for research advice).  Other members of that students' society are
encouraged to help the student with other sources and arguments in advance of
the debate (remember, the entire team or society will benefit if their
arguments are the strongest).  After the presentations, the entire class
is encouraged to join the debate (in an orderly fashion).  The instructor
will serve as a moderator.  At the end of the period, just as in the old
societies, the class will vote for which society "won" the
debate.  The instructor will also have two votes he can use at his
discretion.  In addition, the professor will occasionally invite other
historians and guests to attend these debates. These guests will also be able
to ask questions and will have a vote for the winner. 
    At the end of the semester, the society with the most
"wins" will get twenty points added to their final grade.  The
society that comes in second will get ten points added, and the society that
comes in third will get five points added. 
    Students will be graded on their presentations. 
Grading criteria will include content, research, strength of argument,
communication skills, and overall presentation.  All students will receive
a participation grade for adding to the debate on any given Friday. 
Absences on debate days will be duly noted and should only occur if absolutely
necessary.  If a student misses more than one debate, he or she will be
required to complete extra assignments as provided by the instructor to make up
for that missed debate.  Failure to make up these assignments will result
in a reduction of BOTH the participation and debate grades for that student. 
This should be a fun and informative project for all of us, so work hard and
you will see great results. 
Back to Table of Contents 



Web Page Project
  All students will design a web page based on their
persuasive speech. The page should contain the following information: 
1) Title--A brief title that describes the issue of the page. 
2) Text--the text of the argument, as presented in class (but make sure you
have added ideas and information that came up in the debate--without this
addition, your grade will suffer). 
3) References--At least three scholarly secondary sources and at least three
primary sources documented according to Turabian style (if you do not know what
this is, ask). 
4) Links--Links to other web pages or sites that have information related to
the topic. 
 
Students may also put any graphics on the site that they believe to be in
the public domain. Make sure to include the graphic files on the disk along
with the hatml file. If you are uncertain, ask. 
If you do not know how to create a web page, don't worry, I'll go over it in
class, and will work with you. 
The web assignment is due two weeks after the student presents his/her
speech in class. Turn in the assignment on a 3.5" disk, a zip disk, a CD, or
as an e-mail attachment. If sent by e-mail, you must receive a reply from me
before you consider it turned in.  It must be e-mailed in time for you to
receive the reply before the due date.  Five points will be
deducted for every day (including weekends and holidays) the assignment is
late. Computer problems, lost disks, or failure to back up one's work will not
be considered valid excuses for being late. 
**If your web design includes multiple pages, make sure that the links
include only the file name, as I will place all files in the same folder on the
server.  If you are not sure what
this means, ask.
Evaluation: 
In addition to creating a web page, all students are required to review and
critique all web pages for the class. This critique will include the following
information: 
Content of page (level of research, reference list, persuasiveness of
argument, etc.) 
Design of page (aesthetics, ease of use, etc.) 
These critiques will be sent to the page creator and to the instructor via
e-mail. If you do not have an e-mail account, get one. I will need every
student's e-mail address before the first week of school is over. Students will
not be graded on these critiques, but if they fail to complete them, their own
web page grade will be lowered. The instructor will announce in class when each
critique is due (usually within one week of the page being posted on the McMurry
server). 
After the student has received critiques from the instructor and his/her
classmates, he/she can submit an updated web page for extra points on the web
page grade (maximum increase--10 points). No revisions will be accepted after
the last day of class before finals. 
Return to Table of Contents 



Note on Materials to be
Turned In:
All materials to be turned into the instructor must be on a
3.5" disk, a zip disk, a CD, or they may be sent as an e-mail
attachment.  Students are required to have at least
two back-ups of all material to be turned in.  In the unlikely
event that the instructor loses or misplaces your work, it is your
responsibility to provide a new copy within a day of the instructor's request
for such an item.  Computer glitches, translation problems,
printers problems, and the like will not be considered acceptable excuses
for not having a backup.  If a student fails to produce a new copy of said
item within a day, it will be assumed that the item was never completed in the
first place, and the student will automatically fail the class.  BACK UP
ALL WORK TWICE, SO THAT THIS UNFORTUNATE CIRCUMSTANCE WILL NOT VISIT YOU!!!

Return to Table of Contents 



Academic Honesty
All work for this class is to be the student's own work.
Plagiarism will not be accepted, and cheating will not be tolerated.
"Literary Society" members may help each other on gathering resources
for their debates, but speeches and web pages must be completed by each student
on his/her own. Evidence of cheating on these projects will result in failure
of the class. Additionally, cheating on exams, through use of crib notes or any
other means, will result in failure of the class. 
Return to Table of Contents 






