

rec.martial-arts FAQ part 2



Archive-name: martial-arts/faq/part2

Last-modified: 11 August 2002

Posting-Frequency: twice per month
Go back to Part One.
Go on to Part Three.

rec.martial-arts FAQ - Part 2 of 3

16. What are the different Arts, Schools, Styles?



  Aikido
  Baguazhang
  Brazilian JiuJitsu


  Bushidokan
  Capoeira
  Cha Yon Ryu


  Cuong Nhu
  Daito Ryu Aiki-Jujustu
  Gatka


  Hapkido
  Hwa Rang Do
  Iaido


  Judo
  Jujutsu
  Kajukenbo


  Kali/Escrima/Arnis
  Karate
  Kendo


  Kenjutsu
  Kenpo (Amer.)
  Kempo (Kosho Ryu)


  Kempo (Ryukyu)
  Kobudo
  Krav Maga


  Kyudo



in Part 3 of 3:



  Lua
  MMA/NHB
  Moo Do


  Muay Thai
  Ninjutsu
  Praying Mantis


  ROSS
  SAMBO
  Sanshou


  Savate
  Shogerijutsu
  Shuaijiao


  Silat
  Tae Kwon Do
  Taijiquan


  Wing Chun
  Wushu/Gongfu
  Xingyiquan


  Yoseikan Budo





16) What are the different Arts, Schools and Styles?


This is a question with many, many answers -- some could say that there
are as many styles as there are martial artists.  So, we'd like to
introduce some Schools and Styles that will give you a basic familiarity 
with the world of martial arts.  The Arts are listed alphabetically.



Important note:  This information is true to the best of the knowledge of
those who wrote the descriptions of the various arts.  If your style has
only a small write up or none at all and you have enough information on it
to make a good FAQ entry, write it up in the form shown below and send it to
mcweigel.cs.cmu.edu.



If you have a question about a particular style or its writeup, one option 
is to look in the next section for who contributed to the art's writeup, and
send e-mail to them.  Otherwise, comment to mcweigel@cs.cmu.edu.




16.1) Aikido


(Contributors:
Eric Sotnak - esot@troi.cc.rochester.edu,
 Alex Jackl - ajackl@avs.com)


Intro:


Aikido emphasizes evasion and circular/spiral redirection of an attacker's
aggressive force into throws, pins, and immobilizations as a primary
strategy rather than punches and kicks.


Origin: Japan.

History:


Aikido was founded in 1942 by Morihei Ueshiba (1883-1969). Prior to this
time, Ueshiba called his art "aikibudo" or "aikinomichi".  In developing
aikido, Ueshiba was heavily influenced by Daito Ryu Aikijujitsu, several
styles of Japanese fencing (kenjutsu), spearfighting (yarijutsu), and by
the so- called "new religion": omotokyo.  Largely because of his deep
interest in omotokyo, Ueshiba came to see his aikido as rooted less in
techniques for achieving physical domination over others than in attempting
to cultivate a "spirit of loving protection for all things."  The extent to
which Ueshiba's religious and philosophical convictions influenced the
direction of technical developments and changes within the corpus of aikido
techniques is not known, but many aikido practitioners believe that perfect
mastery of aikido would allow one to defend against an attacker without
causing serious or permanent injury.


Descriptions:


The primary strategic foundations of aikido are:
(1) moving into a position off the line of attack;
(2) seizing control of the attacker's balance by means of 
    leverage and timing;
(3) applying a throw, pin, or other sort of immobilization
    (such as a wrist/arm lock).



Strikes are not altogether absent from the strategic arsenal of the
aikidoist, but their use is primarily (though not, perhaps, exclusively) as
a means of distraction -- a strike (called "atemi") is delivered in order
to provoke a reaction from the aggressor, thereby creating a window of
opportunity, facilitating the application of a throw, pin, or other
immobilization.



Many aikido schools train (in varying degrees) with weapons. The most
commonly used weapons in aikido are the jo (a staff between 4 or 5 feet in
length), the bokken (a wooden sword), and the tanto (a knife, usually made
of wood, for safety). These weapons are used not only to teach defenses
against armed attacks, but also to illustrate principles of aikido
movement, distancing, and timing.


Training:


A competitive variant of aikido (Tomiki aikido) holds structured
competitions where opponents attempt to score points by stabbing with a
foam-rubber knife, or by executing aikido techniques in response to attacks
with the knife.  Most variants of aikido, however, hold no competitions,
matches, or sparring.  Instead, techniques are practiced in cooperation
with a partner who steadily increases the speed, power, and variety of
attacks in accordance with the abilities of the participants. Participants
take turns being attacker and defender, usually performing pre-arranged
attacks and defenses at the lower levels, gradually working up to
full-speed freestyle attacks and defenses.


Sub-Styles:


There are several major variants of aikido.  The root variant is the
"aikikai", founded by Morihei Ueshiba, and now headed by the founder's
grandson, Moriteru Ueshiba.  Several organizations in the United States
are affiliated with the aikikai, including the United States Aikido
Federation, the Aikido Association of America, and Aikido Schools of
Ueshiba.



Other major variants include:

 the "ki society", founded by Koichi Tohei,
  yoshinkan aikido, founded by Gozo Shioda,
  the kokikai organization, headed by Shuji Maruyama,
  "Tomiki aikido" named after its founder, Kenji Tomiki.




16.2)Baguazhang (Pa Kua Chang)


(Contributors:
William Breazeal  - breazeal@tweedledee.ucsb.edu,

Mike Martelle - 3mbm@qlink.queensu.ca)


Intro:


Baguazhang is one of the three orthodox "internal" styles of Chinese martial
art (the other two being Taijiquan and Xingyiquan).  Translated, Bagua means
"Eight Trigram".  This refers to the eight basic principles described in the
ancient metaphysical treatise the Yijing (I-Ching), or "Book of Changes". 
Bagua is meant to be the physical manifestation of these eight principles.
"Zhang" means "palm" and designates Baguazhang as a style of martial art
which emphasizes the use of the open hand over the closed fist.  Baguazhang
as a martial art is based on the theory of continuously changing in response
to the situation at hand in order to overcome an opponent with skill rather
than brute force.


Origin: Northern China.

History:


Although there are several theories as to the origins of Baguazhang, recent
and exhaustive research by martial scholars in mainland China concludes
without reasonable doubt that the art is the creation of one individual,
Dong Haichuan (or Dong Haiquan). Dong was born in Wen'an County, Hebei
Province about 1813. Dong practiced local martial arts (which reportedly
relied heavily upon the use of openhand palm strikes) from his youth and
gained some notoriety as a skilled practitioner. At about 40 years of age,
Dong left home and travelled southward. At some point during his travels
Dong became a member of the Quanzhen (Complete Truth) sect of Taoism. The
Taoists of this sect practiced a method of walking in a circle while
reciting certain mantras. The practice was designed to quiet the mind and
focus the intent as a prelude to enlightenment. Dong later combined the
circle walking mechanics with the boxing he had mastered in his youth to
create a new style based on mobility and the ability to apply techniques
while in constant motion.



Dong Haiquan originally called his art "Zhuanzhang" (Turning Palm). In his
later years, Dong began to speak of the Art in conjunction with the Eight
Trigrams (Bagua) theory expoused in the Book Of Changes (Yijing). When Dong
began teaching his "Zhuanzhang" in Beijing, the vast majority of his students
were already accomplished martial artists in their own right. Dong's teachings
were limited to a few "palm changes" executed while walking the circle and his
theory and techniques of combat. His students took Dong's forms and theories
and combined them with their original arts. The result is that each of Dong's
students ended up with quite different interpretations of the Baguazhang
art.



Most of the various styles of Baguazhang found today can be traced back to
one of several of Dong Haiquan's original students. One of these students
was a man called Yin Fu. Yin studied with Dong longer than any other and was
one of the most respected fighters in the country in his time (he was the
personal bodyguard to the Dowager Empress, the highest prestige position of
its kind in the entire country). Yin Fu was a master of Luo Hanquan, a
Northern Chinese "external" style of boxing before his long apprenticeship
with Dong. Another top student of Dong was Zheng Dinghua, originally a master
of Shuaijiao (Chinese wrestling). Zheng taught a great number of students in
his lifetime and variations of his style are many. A third student of Dong
which created his own Baguazhang variant was Liang Zhenpu. Liang was
Dong's youngest student and was probably influenced by other of Dong's older
disciples. Although Baguazhang is a relatively new form of martial art, it
became famous throughout China during its inventor's lifetime, mainly because
of its effectiveness in combat and the high prestige this afforded its
practitioners.


Description:


Baguazhang is an art based on evasive footwork and a kind of "guerilla
warfare" strategy applied to personal combat. A Bagua fighter relies on
strategy and skill rather than the direct use of force against force or
brute strength in overcoming an opponent. The strategy employed is one of
constant change in response to the spontaneous and "live" quality of
combat. 



Bagua is a very circular art that relies almost entirely on open hand 
techniques and full body movement to accomplish its goals.  It is also 
characterized by its use of spinning movement and extremely evasive 
footwork.  Many of the techniques in Bagua have analogs in other Northern 
Chinese systems;however, Bagua's foot work and body mechanics allow the 
practitioner to set up and execute these techniques while rapidly and smoothly 
changing movement direction and orientation.  Bagua trains the student to be 
adaptable and evasive, two qualities which dramatically decrease the amount 
of physical power needed to successfully perform techniques.



The basis of the various styles of Baguazhang is the circle walk practice.
The practitioner "walks the circle" holding various postures and executing
"palm changes" (short patterns of movement or "forms" which train the body
mechanics and methods of generating momentum which form the basis of the
styles' fighting techniques). All styles have a variation of the "Single Palm
Change" which is the most basic form and is the nucleus of the remaining palm
changes found in the Art. Besides the Single Palm Change, other forms include
the "Double Palm Change" and the "Eight Palm Changes" (also known variously as
the "Eight Mother Palms" or the "Old Eight Palms"). These forms make up the
foundation of the Art. Baguazhang movements have a characteristic circular
nature and there is a great deal of body spinning, turning and rapid changes
in direction. In addition to the Single, Double and Eight Palm Changes, most
but not all styles of Baguazhang include some variation of the "Sixty-Four
Palms." The Sixty-Four Palms include forms which teach the mechanics and
sequence of the specific techniques included in the style. These forms take
the more general energies developed during the practice of the Palm Changes
and focus them into more exact patterns of movement which are applied directly
to a specific combat technique. 


Training: 


Training usually begins with basic movements designed to train the
fundamental body mechanics associated with the Art. Very often the student
will begin with practicing basic palm changes in place (stationary
practice), or by walking the circle while the upper body holds various
static postures (Xingzhuang). The purpose of these exercises is to
familiarize the beginning student with the feeling of maintaining correct
body alignment and mental focus while in motion. The student will progress
to learning the various palm changes and related forms. The Sixty-Four
Palms or other similar patterns are usually learned after some level of
proficiency has been attained with the basic circle walk and palm changes.
Some styles practice the Sixty-Four Palms on the circle while other styles
practice these forms in a linear fashion. All of the forms in Baguazhang
seek to use the power of the whole body in every movement, as the power of
the whole will always be much greater than that of isolated parts. The
body-energy cultivated is flexible, resilient and "elastic" in nature.



In addition to the above, most styles of Baguazhang include various two-
person forms and drills as intermediate steps between solo forms and the
practice of combat techniques. Although the techniques of Baguazhang are
many and various, they all adhere to the above mentioned principles of
mobility and skill. Many styles of Baguazhang also include a variety of
weapons, ranging from the more "standard" types (straight sword,
broadsword, spear) to the "exotic." An interesting difference with other
styles of martial arts is that Baguazhang weapons tend to be "oversized,"
that is they are much bigger than standard weapons of the same type (the
extra weight increases the strength and stamina of the user). 


SUBSTYLES:


Each of Dong Haiquan's students developed their own "style" of Baguazhang
based on their individual backgrounds and previous martial training. Each
style has its own specific forms and techniques. All of the different styles
adhere to the basic principles of Baguazhang while retaining an individual
"flavor" of their own. Most of the styles in existence today can trace their
roots to either The Yin Fu, Zheng Dinghua Or Liang Zhenpu
variations.



Yin Fu styles include a large number of percussive techniques and fast
striking combinations (Yin Fu was said to "fight like a tiger," moving in
swiftly and knocking his opponent to the ground like a tiger pouncing on
prey). The forms include many explosive movements and very quick and evasive
footwork. Variations of the Yin Fu style have been passed down through his
students and their students, including Men Baozhen, Ma Kuei, Gong Baotian,
Fu Zhensong and Lu Shuitian.



Zheng Dinghua styles of Baguazhang include palm changes which are done in a
smooth and flowing manner, with little display of overt power (Zheng
Dinghua's movement was likened to that of a dragon soaring in the clouds).
Popular variants of this style include the Gao Yisheng system, Dragon style
Baguazhang, "Swimming Body" Baguazhang, the Nine Palace system, Jiang
Rongqiaok style (probably the most common form practiced today) and the Sun
Ludang style.



The Liang Zhenpu style was popularized by his student Li Ziming (who was
the president of the Beijing Baguazhang Association for many years and who
did much to spread his art worldwide).



16.3) Brazilian JiuJitsu

(Contributor:
 Don Geddis - webmaster@bjj.org)

Intro:

Possibly the premier ground-fighting martial art. Made famous by Royce
Gracie in the early UFCs in the mid-1990's, it specializes in
submission grappling when both fighters are on the ground. Techniques
include positional control (especially the "guard" position), and
submissions such as chokes and arm locks.

Origin:

Brazil.

History:


In the mid-1800's in Japan, there were a large number of styles ("ryu")
of jiu-jitsu (sometimes spelled "jujitsu"). Techniques varied between
ryu, but generally included all manner of unarmed combat (strikes,
throws, locks, chokes, wrestling, etc.) and occasionally some weapons
training. One young but skilled master of a number of jiu-jitsu styles,
Jigoro Kano, founded his own ryu and created the martial art Judo (aka
Kano-ryu jiu-jitsu) in the 1880's. One of Kano's primary insights was
to include full-power practice against resisting, competent opponents,
rather than solely rely on the partner practice that was much more
common at the time.



One of Kano's students was Mitsuo Maeda, who was also known as Count Koma
("Count of Combat"). Maeda emigrated to Brazil in 1914. He was helped a
great deal by the Brazilian politician Gastão Gracie, whose father
George Gracie had emigrated to Brazil himself from Scotland. In gratitude
for the assistance, Maeda taught jiu-jitsu to Gastao's son Carlos Gracie.
Carlos in turn taught his brothers Osvaldo, Gastão Jr., Jorge, and
Helio.



In 1925, Carlos and his brothers opened their first jiu-jitsu academy,
and Gracie Jiu-Jitsu was born in Brazil.



At this point, the base of techniques in BJJ was similar to those in
Kano's Judo academy in Japan. As the years progressed, however, the
brothers (notably Carlos and Helio) and their students refined their
art via brutal no-rules fights, both in public challenges and on the
street. Particularly notable was their willingness to fight outside of
weight categories, permitting a skilled small fighter to attempt to
defeat a much larger opponent.



They began to concentrate more and more on submission ground fighting,
especially utilizing the guard position. This allowed a weaker man to
defend against a stronger one, bide his time, and eventually emerge
victorious.



In the 1970's, the undisputed jiu-jitsu champion in Brazil was Rolls
Gracie. He had taken the techniques of jiu-jitsu to a new level.
Although he was not a large man, his ability to apply leverage using
all of his limbs was unprecedented. At this time the techniques of the
open guard and its variants (spider guard, butterfly guard) became a
part of BJJ. Rolls also developed the first point system for jiu-jitsu
only competition. The competitions required wearing a gi, awarded
points (but not total victories) for throws and takedowns, and awarded
other points for achieving different ground positions (such as passing
an opponent's guard). After Rolls' death in a hang-gliding accident,
Rickson Gracie became the undisputed (and undefeated!) champion, a
legend throughout Brazil and much of the world. He has been the
exemplar of Brazilian Jiu-Jitsu technique for the last two decades,
since the early 1980's, in both jiu-jitsu competition and no-rules MMA
competition.



Jiu-jitsu techniques have continued to evolve as the art is constantly
tested in both arenas. For example, in the 1990's Roberto "Gordo"
Correa, a BJJ black belt, injured one of his knees, and to protect his
leg he spent a lot of practice time in the half-guard position. When he
returned to high-level jiu-jitsu competition, he had the best
half-guard technique in the world. A position that had been thought of
as a temporary stopping point, or perhaps a defensive-only position,
suddenly acquired a new complexity that rapidly spread throughout the
art.



In the early 1990's, Rorion Gracie moved from Brazil to Los Angeles. He
wished to show the world how well the Gracie art of jiu-jitsu worked.
In Brazil, no-rules Mixed Martial Art (MMA) contests (known as "vale
tudo") had been popular since Carlos Gracie first opened his academy in
1925, but in the world at large most martial arts competition was
internal to a single style, using the specialized rules of that style's
practice.



Rorion and Art Davie conceived of the Ultimate Fighting Championship.
This was a series of pay-per-view television events in the United
States that began in 1993. They pitted experts of different martial
arts styles against each other in an environment with very few rules,
in an attempt to see what techniques "really worked" when put under
pressure. Rorion also entered his brother Royce Gracie, an expert in
Brazilian Jiu-Jitsu, as one of the contestants.



Royce dominated the first years of the UFC against all comers, amassing
eleven victories with no fighting losses. At one event he defeated four
different fighters in one night. This, from a fighter that was smaller
than most of the others (at 170 lbs, in an event with no weight
classes), looked thin and scrawny, and used techniques that most
observers, even experienced martial artists, didn't understand.



In hindsight, much of Royce's success was due to the fact that he
understood very well (and had trained to defend against) the techniques
that his opponents would use, whereas they often had no idea what he
was doing to them. In addition, the ground fighting strategy and
techniques of BJJ are among the most sophisticated in the world.
Besides the immediate impact of an explosion of interest in BJJ across
the world (particularly in the US and Japan), the lasting impact of
Royce's early UFC dominance is that almost every successful MMA fighter
now includes BJJ as a significant portion of their training.
Description:



Brazilian Jiu-Jitsu is primarily a ground-fighting art. Most techniques
involve both fighters on the mat. There is a heavy emphasis on
positional strategy, which is about which fighter is on top, and where
each person's legs are. Positions are stable situations, from which a
large variety of techniques are available to both fighters.



The primary positions include:


 Guard: The person applying the guard is on the bottom with his
    back on the ground; his legs are wrapped around his opponent's hips
    (who is said to be "in the guard").
     Side control: Chest-on-chest but without the legs being entangled.
     Mount: On top of his opponent (who "is mounted"), sitting on his
    chest, with one leg on either side of his torso.
     Back mount: Behind his opponent, with his feet hooked around his
    opponent's hips and upper thighs.



Specific techniques taught are designed either to improve one's
position (for example, to "pass the guard", by going from being "in the
guard" to getting around the opponent's legs, resulting in side
control); or else as a finishing submissions. Most submissions are
either chokes (cutting off the blood supply to the brain) or arm locks
(hyperextending the elbow, or twisting the shoulder).



Belt ranks start at white belt, and progress through blue, purple,
brown, and then black. It generally takes about 2-3 years of training
multiple times per week to be promoted to the next belt rank. However,
there is no formal rank test. Instead, rank is about the ability to
apply jiu-jitsu techniques in a competitive match. A student generally
needs to be able to reliably defeat most other students at a given rank
in order to be promoted to the next rank.



Given the jiu-jitsu roots, and the interest in competition,
occasionally related techniques are taught. In each case, other
specific martial arts focus on these sets of techniques more than BJJ,
and they generally just receive passing mention and rare practice in
BJJ training. For example, takedowns tend to be similar to Judo and
western wrestling; leg locks (such as in Sambo) are not encouraged but
sometimes allowed. Some schools teach street self-defense or weapon
defense as well; this instruction tends to be much more like old-style
Japanese jiu-jitsu with partner practice, and rarely impacts the
day-to-day grappling training. Also, many dedicated BJJ students are
also interested in MMA competition, and attempt to practice their
techniques without a gi, and sometimes with adding striking from boxing
or Muay Thai.

Training:


Most training has students wearing a heavy ("jiu-jitsu" or "Judo")
gi/kimono, on a floor with padded mats. A typical class involves 30
minutes of warm ups and conditioning, 30 minutes of technique practice
with a willing partner, and 30 minutes of free sparring training,
against an opponent of equal skill who attempts to submit you.



Most of the training is done with all students on the mat. For example,
training usually beings with both students facing each other from a
kneeling position.



Competition is also encouraged. For a jiu-jitsu tournament, competitors
are divided by age, belt rank, and weight class. Time limits are
generally five to ten minutes, depending on belt rank. Matches start
with both competitiors standing, on a floor with a padded mat. A tap
out from submission ends the match. If time runs out without a
submission, points determine the winner:


 2 points: Takedown from standing; Knee-on-stomach position; or
    Scissor, sweep, or flip, using legs (from bottom position to top)
     3 points: Passing the guard
     4 points: Mount; or Mount on back (with leg hooks in)



Many BJJ students are also interested in open submission grappling
tournaments (different points rules, usually no gi), or Mixed Martial
Arts (MMA). Most BJJ instructors encourage such competition, and often
assist in the training. However, typically BJJ classes wear a gi, start
from the knees, and prohibit strikes.

Sub-Styles:


None.



However, note that Brazilian Jiu-Jitsu is sometimes taught under
slightly different names. In Brazil it is generally known simply as
"jiu-jitsu".



Members of the Gracie family often call it "Gracie Jiu-Jitsu", and in
fact this name probably pre-dates the now more-generic BJJ for
labelling the art when outside of Brazil. (This probably would have
become the generic name for the art, but Rorion Gracie trademarked the
phrase for his academy in Torrance, CA. A later lawsuit between Rorion
Gracie and Carley Gracie was resolved to permit Gracie family members
to use that phrase when teaching their family's art of jiu-jitsu.
However, the generic term "Brazilian Jiu-Jitsu" is now preferred for
referring to the art independent of instructor.)



Also, the Machado brothers (cousins of the Gracies) sometimes call
their style "Machado Jiu-Jitsu". Any of these names refer to basically
the same art.



16.4) Bushidokan


(Contributor:
 Bob Blount - robertb@sound.net)



Bushidokan is an eclectic art of recent origin, founded by Jim
Harrison in the late 1960's.  Harrison has studied Judo and Shorin-Ryu
karate extensively.  The Bushidokan Art is a combination of Okinawan
karate, judo, and some JJ, with the primary emphasis on karate.  The
karate portion of Bushidokan's training is quite similar to Shotokan -
definitely Okinawan in ancestry.  Bushidokan is best suited for those
interested in effective street self-defense, tournament fighting, and
fairly rugged physical conditioning.



Beginning students learn seven basic stances, seven basic strikes (six
linear, one circular), seven basic blocks (one of which is circular)
and seven basic kicks.  Many of the self-defenses taught incorporate
techniniques not included in the "basic" seven, thus exposing the
student to a greater variety.  These include a number of throws, a few
soft (redirecting) blocks, and several wrist/hand locks. Two basic
self-defense strategies - a direct counter and an indirect counter -
are taught for each type of attack.  Sparring is introduced as
students progress, but is always optional, and ranges from "no
contact" to "full contact".



16.5) Capoeira


(Contributor:
Daniel C. Sobral - e8917523@linf.unb.br,
"Lagartixa" (Gecko) - nworthin@rohan.sdsu.edu)


Intro:

This is a very acrobatic, very energetic Brazilian martial art.

Origin: Angola and Brazil

History:


Capoeira is the common name for the group of African martial arts that came 
out of west Africa and were modifed and mixed in Brazil. These orginal
stlyes included weapons, grappling and striking as well as animal forms that 
became incorpated into different components and sub styles of the popular 
art.



In the 1500's, black slaves from Africa were used in Brazil to build the
empire of the sugar cane. These slaves lacked a form of self-defense, and
in a way quite parallel to Karate, they developed a martial-art with the
things they had in hand, namely, sugar cane knives and 3/4 staffs. Being
slaves, they had to disguise the study of the art, and that is how the
dance came into it.



In the early 1800's Capoeira was outlawed in Brazil, especially in its
"home state" of Bahia, where gangs utilized it as their personal fighting
style against police.



Capoeira was born in the "senzalas", the places where the slaves were kept,
and developed in the "quilombos", the places where they used to run to when
they fled from their enslavers.


Description:


Capoeira consists of a stylized dance, practiced in a circle called the
"roda", with sound background provided by percussion instruments, like the
"agogo", the "atabaqui", etc.  The "Berimbau" is a non-percussion 
instrument that is always used on rodas.



Capoeira relies heavily on kicks and leg sweeps for attacks and dodges for
defenses.  Is not uncommon to not be taught any kind of hand strike of
parry, though arm positioning for blocks is taught.



The "ginga" (meaning "swing), the footwork of Capoeira, consists in changing
the basic stance (body facing the adversary, front leg flexed with body
weight over it, the other leg stretched back) from the right leg to the left
leg again and again.



Capoeira also puts a heavy emphasis on ground fighting, but not grappling
and locks. Instead, it uses a ground stance (from the basic stance, you
just fall over your leg stretched back, flexing it, and leaving the front
leg stretched ahead), from which you make feints, dodges, kicks, leg
sweeps, acrobatics, etc.



Hand positioning is important but it's used only to block attacks and
ensure balance, though street fighting "capoeiristas" use the hands for
punches.



When fighting, it is rare to stop in one stance, and in this case, you just
"follow" your opponent with your legs, preventing him from getting close,
or preparing a fast acrobatic move to take advantage when he attacks. The
rest of the time, you just keep changing stances, feinting, and doing the
equivalent of boxing "jabs".


Training:


After a thorough warm-up, standing exercises are done, with emphasis on the
"ginga", the footwork characteristic of the art, and on the basic kicks:
"bencao", a front-stomping kick, "martelo", a roundhouse kick, "chapa", a
side-kick, "meia-lua", a low turning kick, "armada", a high turning kick,
"queixada", an outside-inside crescent kick. Then walking sequences are
done, with the introduction of sommersaults, backflips and headstands, in
couples and individual. Some more technical training follows, with couples
beginning a basic and slow "jogo", and then the whole class forms and goes
for "roda" game for at least 30 minutes.



Capoeira conditions and develops the muscles, especially the abdominal
muscles.


Sub-Styles:


Regional: Capoeira in a more artistic, open form, giving more way to
athletic prowess and training. The newer, faster, more popular style created
by mestre Bimba (the guy who was responsible for the legalization of
capoeira and the founder of the first academy). Breakdancing evolved from
this style, and 90% of all breakdancing moves come directly from capoeira.
This is a faster game, less a fight and more of a showing off. Flourishes,
high kicks, and aerial, acrobatic maneuvers are the hallmark of the regional
game, which is usually played to the beat of the berimbau known as Sao Bento
Grande.



Angola: a more closed, harder style that is closest to the original African 
systems that came to Brazil. The "traditional" capoeira, the game is
accompanied by a specific beat of the berimbau by the same name. Angola
games are generally slow and low to the ground, and incorporate a lot of
trickery, sweeps and takedowns, and physically grueling movements that
require great strength and balance.



Iuna: Iuna is not really a style of capoeira. Rather, it refers to a rhythm
of the berimbau that is played when somebody dies or when mestres (masters)
play alone. There is no singing when iuna is played, and only masters
allowed to play during iuna. 



16.6) Cha Yon Ryu


(Contributor:
Ross Deforrest - ssor@prismnet.com)


Intro:  An eclectic, fairly new martial art.

History:


The Cha Yon Ryu ("Natural Way") system was founded in 1968 by Kim Soo of
Houston, Texas, who remains Director of the system.  Grand Master Kim, who
holds upper dan rankings in both tae kwon do and hapkido chose to
incorporate into the Cha Yon Ryu system techniques and forms from several
different martial arts.


Description:


Tae Kwon Do contributes kicking techniques, strong stances and direct,
linear strikes and blocks, as does Shotokan Karate.  With the study of
movements from Okinawa te (Okinawa), the Cha Yon Ryu practitioner starts to
add techniques with some angularity to his/her repertoire, and eventually
progresses to the fluid, circular movements of Ch'uan Fa Gongfu.  Hapkido
is the martial art from which are drawn defenses against chokes, grabs and
armed attacks, as well as various throwing and falling techniques.


Training:


The Dojang Hun  (Training Hall Oath)

Seek perfection of character
Live the way of truth
Endeavor
Be faithful
Respect your seniors
Refrain from violent behavior


Sub-Styles: None


16.7) Cuong Nhu (pronounced "Kung New")


(Contributors:

Elizabeth Roman and Robert First - rafirst@unity.ncsu.edu and 
http://www4.ncsu.edu/unity/users/r/rafirst/cooldojo/)



Cuong Nhu is another eclectic, fairly new martial art, founded in 1965 by
Master Ngo Dong in Vietnam.  The first US school opened in Gainesville FL in
1971.  Cuong Nhu is an integrated martial art blending hard aspects ("cuong"
in Vietnamese) from Shotokan Karate, Wing Chun Gongfu, and American Boxing,
with influences from the soft ("nhu" in Vietnamese) arts of Judo, Aikido,
and Taiji, in addition to Vovinam, a Vietnamese martial art using both hard
and soft techniques. In keeping with its inclusive nature, Cuong Nhu
instruction extends beyond the traditionally martial to public speaking,
poetry, paintint, and philosophy.  There is a strong emphasis on developing
self control, modesty, and a non-defeatist attitude.



Beginning students focus on the hard, linear arts, mostly modified
Shotokan Karate techniques and katas.  Experienced students add
movements from more advanced softer, circular arts such as Aikido and
Taiji.  All levels get some exposure to the entire range of styles.
Training emphasizes moral and philosophical development, and students
discuss the "Code of Ethics" and selections from Cuong Nhu philosophy
in class. As with other styles, belt color indicates rank as certified
by regional testing.



There are approximately 70 Cuong Nhu dojos in the US. For more information
or the location of a school near you, the Cuong Nhu Oriental Martial
Arts Association (CNOMAA) can be reached at (904) 737-7094 or http://www.cuongnhu.com.



16.8) Daito Ryu Aiki-Jujustu


(Contributors:
Torben Alstrup/Ole Kingston - alstrup@imada.ou.dk

Intro:  A prominent sub-style of Jujutsu

History:


Daito-ryu Aiki-Jujutsu is an old Jujutsu style presumably founded my
Minamoto, Yoshimitsu in the eleventh century.  Originally, it was only
practised by the highest ranking Samurais in the Takeda family in the Kai
fiefdom in northern Japan.



Feudal overlord Takeda, Shingen died in 1573, and his kinsman Takeda,
Kunitsugu moved to the Aizu fiefdom, where he became Jito - overseer of the
fief. Kunitsugu introduced Daitoryu Aikijujutsu at the Aizu fiefdom, where
the secret fighting art only was taught to the feudal lords and the highest
ranking samurais and ladies in waiting.



The feudal system was broken down after 1868 when the Meiji restoration
begun.  Saigo, Tanomo (1829-1905), the heir to Daito-ryu gave the system to
Takeda, Sogaku (1859-1943) and instructed him to pass it on to future
generations. Takeda, Sogaku first used the term "Daito-ryu Aikijujutsu" in
the beginning of the twentieth century and taught the art of it to many
students.



Takeda, Sogaku taught Daito-ryu from the beginning of the twentieth century
until his death in 1943 two of his best known students were Ueshiba, 
Morihei, founder of Aikido and Choi, Yong Sul, founder of Hapkido.



Other prominent 20th century Daito-ryu masters include Horikawa, Kodo
(1894-1980); Takuma, Hisa (1895-1979); Hakaru, Mori (1931-), the current
director of the Daitoryu Aikijujutsu Takumakai; Sagawa, Yukiyoshi (1902-);
Takeda, Tokimune (1916-1993), son of Takeda, Sogaku; Katsuyuki, Kondo
(1945-); and Okamoto, Seigo (1925-), who is often considered the most
progressive teacher of Daitoryu Aikijujutsu.


Description and Training:


The way of teaching Daitoryu comes from Takeda, Sogaku's students in the
same manner as the understanding, feeling and character of the techniques.
Daito-ryu Aikijujutsu has four levels of techniques: Shoden (Lowest),
Chuden (advanced), Okuden (highest) and Hiden (secret techniques).


Shoden
The training in Daito-ryu starts with Shoden, where the student learns
ukemi (falling and rolling), taisabaki (moving the body), tesabaki and
ashisabaki (movements of the hands and feet and legs), defense against
grappling, and continues with defense against punches, kicks and weapons,
as for instance short and long staffs (tanbo, jo and chobo) and knives and
swords (tanto and katana).



There are techniques that can be done from standing, sitting or lying
positions. The first transmission scroll Hiden Mokuroku describes the first
118 jujutsu techniques from the Shoden level.


Chuden
These are advanced jujutsu techniques with large soft movements as known
from Aikido.  The actual aiki training consists of a combination of these
techniques and those from Shoden.  At this level of training it is allowed
to use some amount of force, several steps and large movements.


Okuden
When doing Okuden all movements should be as small as possible.  Breathing,
reflexes, circles and timing are used instead of muscles; the techniques
are small and fast, and it is not necessary to hold an attacker in order to
throw him.



The reflexes of the attacker are used against him.  He gets a soft shock,
similar to an electric shock activating his reflexes, and it becomes easy
to manipulate the body of the attacker so it is felt as an extension of
one's own.


Hiden
These are the secret techniques. The real aiki consists always of soft
techniques that only work properly when the whole body and proper breathing
is used. The attacker is touched easily, you are as glued to him, and the
techniques are so small that even experienced budokas cannot see what is
happening.  However, the most fascinating part of Daito-ryu Aikijujutsu is
that it is unnecessary to use physical power for incapacitating the
attacker his own force is turned against him.



16.9) Gatka

(Contributor:
Arun Singh - arun145@lycos.com)

Intro:

A Sikh martial art.

Origins and History:


Gatka is the martial art of the Sikhs, and is tied in with the
religion Sikhism. It's a weapons-based martial art, which was
imparted to the Sikhs in the time of Guru Hargobind Ji (the sixth
Guru of the Sikhs) by the Rajputs (Hindu warriors of northern India)
in the 16th century, in gratitude for their release from imprisonment
by the fledgling Sikh army of that time. The Sikhs at that time
opposed the Mughal Empire, which violently oppressed both Sikhs and
Hindus in the name of Islam.



The Tenth Master of the Sikhs, Guru Gobind Singh Ji, was an extremely
proficient martial artist.



He continued to encourage the Sikhs to train seriously in the martial
arts, and in 1699 founded the Khalsa, a special Order, to which all
Sikhs would thereafter aspire to joining. The Khalsa was subject to
strict military and personal discipline, and were enjoined to, inter
alia, always carry 5 items with them: the Kanga (a small wooden
comb), Kachhehra (long drawers instead of a loincloth), Kara (a steel
bracer worn on the right wrist), Kesh (uncut hair) and Kirpan (curved
sword). The Khalsa was enjoined to train to fight, and to vigorously
resist the oppression of any religious community, including Sikhs and
Hindus. The wearing of the kirpan represented the martial character
of the Khalsa, and all Sikhs, men, women and children, were
encouraged to resist their Mughal oppressors, and to train diligently
in gatka.



Gatka was used succesfully by the Sikhs throughout the 16th and 17th
centuries, in numerous battles against the Mughal forces. Eventually,
the Sikhs succeeded in deposing the Mughal overlords, and in creating
a new, tolerant rulership in the Punjab (the "Land of Five Rivers", a
region in modern-day India and Pakistan).



Gatka is, and has always been, taught as a spiritual exercise in
Sikhism. Sikhism requires its followers to become absorbed in
honouring the Name of God, and this is taught through the ecstatic
exercise of gatka. Sikhism and gatka are inextricably intertwined, in
many ways.

Description:


Gatka actually refers to the soti, a wooden stick used in training,
which is equipped with a basket hilt. The entire martial art is based
on the correct use of a vast array of melee (hand-to-hand) weapons.
The foundation of the art is the panthra, a basic form and
methodology for moving the feet, body, arms and weapons correctly, in
unison. Gatka is normally taught with rhythmic accompaniment, and the
object is to achieve fluid, natural and flowing movement, without
hesitation, doubt or anxiety. The attacking and blocking methods are
all based upon the positions of the hands, feet and weapon(s) during
the panthra dexterity exercise. Many weapons are taught with special
methodologies, in addition to the panthra exercise.



There are set of unique "chambers" and other techniques, which are
unique to certain weapons, such as the khanda (two-edged sword), the
tabar (axe) and the barcha (spear).



The most common weapon used by gatka exponents today is the lathi (a
stick of varying length), but all of the other traditional weapons
are still taught. A common combination in that hands of gatka
practitioners of today and in the past is the sword and shield.



The panthra exercise is a flowing, non-stop movement, and there are
no specific "techniques" as such in gatka. Rather, the methods of
attacking and defending are the same, and the application depends on
the circumstances at the time. The panthra exercise is practised at
the same time as the "Jaap Sahib" prayer is being sung. Also, a
three-beat-per-cycle is played by a drummer at the same time. This
assists in developing natural and flowing co-ordination.

Training:


Most gatka groups train in a religious or semi-religious situation,
such as in a gurdwara (a Sikh place of worship) or in a Sikh cultural
centre or school. However, in recent years a number of "Akhara"
(regiment or gymnasium) organisations have been founded, with the
express purpose of teaching and disseminating the skill of gatka.



Gatka students always train with "both hands full", as this is both
an excellent exercise for matching the two halves of the body and is
emphasised as ideal for combat. Gatka emphasises the superiority of
having something in both hands, whether it's two sticks, or a stick
and a sword, or a sword and a shield or any other combination.



At an advanced level, gatka is always tailored to the practitioner.
Hence the gatka practitioner will eventually focus all of his effort
on training his or her abilities with a chosen weapon or combination
of weapons.

Competition:


Gatka was never originally intended as a competitive sport. However,
recently a number of modern gatka organisations have introduced
competition. Normally, these are based on a "best of two" or a "best
of Five" hits contest between two practitiners.

How to find an instructor:


The best traditional gatka practitioners outside the Punjab are known
by word of mouth only. However, some organisations have recently
begun teaching their own variation of gatka, in schools and clubs, in
the same way as any other martial art. These organisations usually
advertise, too. However, their gatka may differ significantly from
the traditional form of the art, either by accident or design. It may
be fruitful to consult your local gurdwara (Sikh temple) officials in
order to find a reputable gatka instructor who is willing to teach
you.  Discretion (most gatka experts disdain being the centre of
attention) and courtesy will be indispensable in finding yourself a
willing instructor in the art.



16.10) HapKiDo


(Contributors:
Randy Pals - pals@ipact.com,
Ray Terry - rterry@hpkel02.cup.hp.com,
Dakin Burdick - burdick@silver.ucs.indiana.edu)


Intro:


This Korean art is sometimes confused with Aikido, since the Korean and
Japanese translation of the names is the same.


Origin: Korea

History:


Hapkido history is the subject of some controversy.



Some sources say that the founder of Hapkido, Choi, Yong Sul was a
houseboy/servant (some even say "the adopted son") of Japanese Daito Ryu
Aikijujutsu GrandMaster Takeda, Sokaku.  In Japan, Choi used the Japanese
name Yoshida, Tatsujutsu since all immigrants to Japan took Japanese names
at that time.  Choi's Japanese name has also been given as Asao, Yoshida by
some sources.  According to this view, Choi studied under Takeda in Japan
from 1913, when he was aged 9, until Takeda died in 1943.  However, Daito 
Ryu records do not reflect this, so hard confirmation has not been 
available.  Some claim that Choi's Daito Ryu training was limited to 
attending seminars.



Ueshiba, Morihei, the founder of Aikido, was also a student of Takeda (this 
is not disputed).  Hapkido and Aikido both have significant similarities to 
Daito Ryu Aikijujutsu, so it would seem that Hapkido's link to it is real, 
regardless of how and where Choi was trained.



Choi returned to Korea after Takeda's death and began studying Korean arts
and teaching Yu Sool or Yawara (other names for jujutsu), eventually
calling his kwan ("school") the Hapki Kwan.  Ji, Han Jae, began studying
under Choi and eventually started his own school, where he taught what he
called Hapkido, after the grandmaster's school.  Along the way, Hapkido
adopted various techniques from Tang Soo Do, Tae Kyon, and other Korean
kwans (schools).



Korean sources may tend to emphasize the Korean arts lineage of Hapkido
over the Aikijujutsu lineage, with some even omitting the Aikijujutsu
connection.  However, as noted above, the connection can be seen in the 
techniques.



Ji now calls his system Sin Moo Hapkido.  He currently lives and teaches in
California, as does another former Choi student, Myung, Kwang Sik, who is
GrandMaster of the World Hapkido Federation.



Some other Choi Hapkido students are still living.  Chang, Chun Il
currently resides in NY, and Im, Hyon Soo who lives and teaches in Korea. 
Both of these men were promoted to 9th dan by Choi.  One of the first
Hapkido masters to bring the art to the western culture was Han, Bong Soo.



In the 1970's and 80's Hapkido was taught as the style of choice to
elite South Korean armed forces units.


Description:


Hapkido combines joint locks, pressure points, throws, kicks, and strikes
for practical self-defense.  More soft than hard and more internal than
external, but elements of each are included.  Emphasizes circular motion,
non-resistive movements, and control of the opponent.



Although Hapkido contains both outfighting and infighting techniques, the
goal in most situations is to get inside for a close-in strike, lock, or
throw.  When striking, deriving power from hip rotation is strongly
emphasized.


Training:


Varies with organization and instructor.  As a general rule, beginners
concentrate on basic strikes and kicks, along with a few joint locks and
throws.  Some of the striking and kicking practice is form-like, that is,
with no partner, however, most is done with a partner who is holding heavy
pads that the student strikes and kicks full power.



Advanced students add a few more strikes and kicks as well as many more 
throws, locks, and pressure points.  There is also some weapons training 
for advanced students - primarily belt, kubatan, cane, and short
staff.



Some schools do forms, some do not.  Some do sparring and some do not, 
although at the advanced levels, most schools do at least some sparring.
Many Hapkido techniques are unsuitable for use in sparring, as their use 
would result in injury, even when protective gear is used.  Thus, sparring 
typically uses only a limited subset of techinques.



There is generally an emphasis on physical conditioning and excercise, 
including "ki" exercises.


Sub-Styles: [more info needed]


16.11) Hwa Rang Do


(Contributor:
Carsten Jorgensen - hwrang@usa.net)


Intro:


Hwa Rang Do is a comprehensive martial arts system whose training
encompasses unarmed combat, weaponry, internal training and healing
techniques.  Translated, Hwa Rang Do means "the way of flowering
manhood".


Origin:	Korea

History:


For the ancient history of the Hwarang, please refer to the Ancient Korean
History section of 
http://www.hwarangdo.com/hrd1.htm.



In March 1942 present day founder of Hwa Rang Do, Dr. Joo Bang Lee and his
brother, Joo Sang Lee was introduced to the Buddhist monk Suahm Dosa by
their father, who was a personal friend of the monk, and they began their
formal training aged 5 & 6. 



The brothers lived and trained as the sole students with the monk mostly in
weekends and during school vacations but also trained in other martial arts
when they were unable to train under Suahm Dosa.  Influences include
Boxing, Yudo, Komdo, and Tang Soo Do.  In addition the Lee Brothers
attained Master level of Dae Dong Ryu Yu Sul (modern name - Hapkido) from
its founder Choi Yong Sool in October 1956. 



In April 1960 Dr. Joo Bang Lee created and founded his martial art by
combining Suham Dosa's techniques with the other systems he had trained. He
choose the name Hwa Rang Kwan to describe his system and this also marked
the first time the Hwa Rang was used publicly in connection with unarmed
Korean martial arts.  There is no way of knowing if the techniques Suahm
Dosa taught the brothers actually was the martial art of the Silla Hwa
Rang, or another form of monk martial art. 



In 1967, at the request of President Park, Dr. Joo Bang Lee organized the
unification of the Korean martial arts and directed the Unified Korean
Martial Arts Exposition on May 27, 1968 at the Jang Chung Sports Arena in
Seoul.  Since it was difficult for all martial art organization leaders to
agree on methods of administration, this organization was also disbanded
shortly after the exposition. 



Following the dissolution, Dr. Joo Bang Lee concentrated his efforts
solely on the development of his martial art to the exclusion of all
other martial arts. He renamed it Hwa Rang Do translated to mean "The
Way of the Flowering Manhood". (Do - represents "the way" or the
"martial art"). Also this marked the first time the character for "Way"
was used in connection with the Hwa Rang and the unarmed martial
arts.



In 1968, Head Grandmaster Joo Sang Lee introduced Hwa Rang Do to the
United States of America. Dr. Joo Bang Lee became the system's supreme
grandmaster upon Suahm Dosa's death in 1969. He immigrated to America in
1972 and founded the World Hwa Rang Do Association and since then Hwa
Rang Do has spread all over the world. Today Dr. Joo Bang Lee presides
over the World Hwa Rang Do Association, Hwa Rang Do World Headquarters
in Downey, California (USA).


Description:


Hwa Rang Do is a combination of UM (soft/circular movement) and YANG
(hard/linear movement).  The Mu Sul (martial aspects) of Hwa Rang Do can be
further explained in four distinct - though interconnecting - major paths
of study. 



NAE GONG - deals with developing, controlling, and directing one's Ki, or
internal energy force, through breathing and meditation exercises in
conjunction with specific physical techniques. 



WAE GONG - Wae gong includes more than 4000 offensive and defensive
combative applications. Combining elements predominantly tense and linear
in nature with those soft and circular, these techniques mesh to form a
natural fighting system. This phase includes full instruction in all hand
strikes and blocks (trapping and grabbing as well as deflection
applications, using the hands, wrist, forearm, elbows, arms and shoulders),
365 individual kicks, throws and falls from any position and onto any
surfaces, human anatomical structure as it pertains to combat applications
(knowing and utilizing the body's weak points to effectively control the
opponent, regardless of their size), joint manipulation and breaking,
finger pressure-point application, prisoner arrest, control and transport,
grappling applications, forms, offensive choking and flesh-tearing
techniques, defense against multiple opponents, breaking techniques,
counter-attacks, and killing techniques. 



MOO GI GONG - involves the offensive and defensive use of the over 108
traditional weapons found within 20 categories of weaponry. By learning
these various weapon systems, the practitioner can most effectively utilize
any available object as a weapon as the situation demands. 



SHIN GONG - is the study, development, and control of the human mind in
order to attain one's full potential and mental capabilities. Techniques
are taught to achieve an increase in one's total awareness, focus, and
concentration levels. Included are instruction in : controlling one's mind;
development of the "sixth sense"; memory recall; the study of human
character and personalities; practical psychology; visualization; the art
of concealment and stealth as utilized by special agents (Sulsa); as well
as advanced, secretive applications.  Hwa Rang Do teaches both the martial
art (mu-sul) and healing art (in-sul). If one is able to injure or worse,
then he/she should know how to heal as well, once again maintaining harmony
through balance of opposites. First aid applications, revival techniques
are taught in conjunction with the traditional full studies of acupuncture,
Royal Family acupressure, herbal and natural medicines, and bone setting.


Training:


A typical training session includes Meditation (beginning and end of
class). Total body stretching and warm-up exercises. Basic punching and
kicking practice. Ki power exercises. "Basic-8" combination drills (which
vary by belt rank). Two-man countering techniques (vary by belt rank). Open
session which may include: sparring, tumbling, grappling, sweeps, or
advanced techniques. Self-defense techniques. Cool down exercises. Hwa Rang
Do code of ethics. 



For further information, please refer to http://www.hwarangdo.com
and/or write to:

	World Hwa Rang Do Association
	8200 E. Firestone Blvd.,
	Downey, Ca 90241
	(310) 861-0111


Sub-styles:  None


16.12) Iaido


(Contributor:
Al Bowers - bowers@wilbur.dfrf.nasa.gov)


Intro: The Art of drawing the sword for combat.

Origin: Japan

History:


This art is very old, and has strong philosophical and historical ties to
Kenjutsu.  It was practiced by Japanese warriors for centuries. 


Description:


The object is to draw the sword perfectly, striking as it is drawn,  so
that the opponent has no chance to defend against the strike. 


Training: 


Usually practiced in solo form (kata), but also has partner forms
(kumetachi).


Sub-Styles: Muso Shinden Ryu, Muso Jikishin Ryu, and others. 


16.13) Judo


(Contributors:
Neil Ohlenkamp - JudoSensei@aol.com,
Michael D'Auben - 72517.1031@compuserve.com)


Intro:


Judo is a sport and a way to get in great shape, but is also very useful 
for self-defense.


Origin: Japan

History:


Judo is derived from Jujutsu (see Jujutsu). It was created by Professor
Jigoro Kano who was born in Japan in 1860 and who died in 1938 after a
lifetime of promoting Judo. Mastering several styles of jujutsu in his
youth he began to develop his own system based on modern sports principles.
In 1882 he founded the Kodokan Judo Institute in Tokyo where he began
teaching and which still is the international authority for Judo. The name
Judo was chosen because it means the "gentle way". Kano emphasised the
larger educational value of training in attack and defense so that it could
be a path or way of life that all people could participate in and benefit
from. He eliminated some of the traditional jujutsu techniques and changed
training methods so that most of the moves could be done with full force to
create a decisive victory without injury. 



The popularity of Judo increased dramatically after a famous contest hosted
by the Tokyo police in 1886 where the Judo team defeated the most
well-known jujutsu school of the time. It then became a part of the
Japanese physical education system and began its spread around the world.
In 1964 men's Judo competition became a part of the Olympics, the only
eastern martial art that is an official medal sport. In 1992 Judo
competition for women was added to the Olympics. 


Description: 


Judo is practiced on mats and consists primarily of throws (nage-waza),
along with katame-waza (grappling), which includes osaekomi-waza (pins),
shime-waza (chokes), and kansetsu-waza (armbars). Additional techniques,
including atemi-waza (striking) and various joint locks are found in the
judo katas.  Judo is generally compared to wrestling but it retains its
unique combat forms.  As a daughter to Jujutsu these techniques are also
often taught in Judo classes. 



Because the founder was involved in education (President of Tokyo 
University) Judo training emphasizes mental, moral and character 
development as much as physical training.  Most instructors stress the 
principles of Judo such as the principle of yielding to overcome greater 
strength or size, as well as the scientific principles of leverage, 
balance, efficiency, momentum and control.



Judo would be a good choice for most children because it is safe and fun.


Training: 


Judo training has many forms for different interests.  Some students 
train for competition by sparring and entering the many tournaments that 
are available.  Other students study the traditional art and forms (kata)
of Judo.  Other students train for self-defense, and yet other students 
play Judo for fun. Black belts are expected to learn all of these aspects 
of Judo.


Sub-Styles:


Because Judo originated in modern times it is organized like other major
sports with one international governing body, the International Judo
Federation (IJF), and one technical authority (Kodokan).  There are several
small splinter groups  (such as the Zen Judo Assoc.) who stress judo as a
"do" or path, rather than a sport. 



Unlike other martial arts, Judo competition rules, training methods, and
rank systems are relatively uniform throughout the world. 



16.14) Jujutsu 


(Contributor:
Darren Wilkinson - wilkinson@hippo.herston.uq.oz.au)


Intro:

Old, practical, fighting art.  A parent to Judo, Aikido, and
Hapkido.

Origin: Japan
	
History:


The begining of Ju-jutsu can be found in the turbulent period of Japanese
history between the 8th and 16th Century.  During this time, there was
almost constant civil war in Japan and the classical weaponed systems were
developed and constantly refined on the battle field.  Close fighting
techniques were developed as part of these systems to be use in conjunction
with weapons against armoured, armed apponents.  It was from these
techniques that Ju-jutsu arose. 



The first publicly recognised Ju-jutsu ryu was formed by Takenouchie
Hisamori in 1532 and consisted of techniques of sword, jo-stick and