


Syllabus - Implementing educational change for social justice in Marginalized Settings


<!--
function MM_swapImgRestore() { //v3.0
  var i,x,a=document.MM_sr; for(i=0;a&&i<a.length&&(x=a[i])&&x.oSrc;i++) x.src=x.oSrc;
}

function MM_preloadImages() { //v3.0
  var d=document; if(d.images){ if(!d.MM_p) d.MM_p=new Array();
    var i,j=d.MM_p.length,a=MM_preloadImages.arguments; for(i=0; i<a.length; i++)
    if (a[i].indexOf("#")!=0){ d.MM_p[j]=new Image; d.MM_p[j++].src=a[i];}}
}

function MM_findObj(n, d) { //v4.0
  var p,i,x;  if(!d) d=document; if((p=n.indexOf("?"))>0&&parent.frames.length) {
    d=parent.frames[n.substring(p+1)].document; n=n.substring(0,p);}
  if(!(x=d[n])&&d.all) x=d.all[n]; for (i=0;!x&&i<d.forms.length;i++) x=d.forms[i][n];
  for(i=0;!x&&d.layers&&i<d.layers.length;i++) x=MM_findObj(n,d.layers[i].document);
  if(!x && document.getElementById) x=document.getElementById(n); return x;
}

function MM_swapImage() { //v3.0
  var i,j=0,x,a=MM_swapImage.arguments; document.MM_sr=new Array; for(i=0;i<(a.length-2);i+=3)
   if ((x=MM_findObj(a[i]))!=null){document.MM_sr[j++]=x; if(!x.oSrc) x.oSrc=x.src; x.src=a[i+2];}
}
//-->












 
 





 




 




 











 
Search Course Site
 
 

 


 

			Help
 










































 Course Title: 
    A188 - Implementing educational change for social justice in Marginalized Settings




    Today's Date:
    Tuesday, 27-Aug-2002 14:01:33 EDT
  
















[Course Number and title]


<!--
 /* Font Definitions */
@font-face
	{font-family:Wingdings;
	panose-1:5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0;
	mso-font-charset:2;
	mso-generic-font-family:auto;
	mso-font-pitch:variable;
	mso-font-signature:0 268435456 0 0 -2147483648 0;}
@font-face
	{font-family:AGaramond;
	panose-1:0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0;
	mso-font-charset:0;
	mso-generic-font-family:roman;
	mso-font-format:other;
	mso-font-pitch:variable;
	mso-font-signature:3 0 0 0 1 0;}
 /* Style Definitions */
p.MsoNormal, li.MsoNormal, div.MsoNormal
	{mso-style-parent:"";
	margin:0in;
	margin-bottom:.0001pt;
	mso-pagination:widow-orphan;
	font-size:12.0pt;
	font-family:"Times New Roman";
	mso-fareast-font-family:"Times New Roman";}
h1
	{mso-style-next:Normal;
	margin:0in;
	margin-bottom:.0001pt;
	mso-pagination:widow-orphan;
	page-break-after:avoid;
	mso-outline-level:1;
	font-size:12.0pt;
	font-family:"Times New Roman";
	mso-font-kerning:0pt;}
h2
	{mso-style-next:Normal;
	margin:0in;
	margin-bottom:.0001pt;
	mso-pagination:widow-orphan;
	page-break-after:avoid;
	mso-outline-level:2;
	font-size:12.0pt;
	font-family:"Times New Roman";
	color:green;}
h3
	{mso-style-next:Normal;
	margin:0in;
	margin-bottom:.0001pt;
	text-align:right;
	mso-pagination:widow-orphan;
	page-break-after:avoid;
	mso-outline-level:3;
	font-size:12.0pt;
	font-family:"Times New Roman";
	color:red;}
h4
	{mso-style-next:Normal;
	margin:0in;
	margin-bottom:.0001pt;
	mso-pagination:widow-orphan;
	page-break-after:avoid;
	mso-outline-level:4;
	font-size:12.0pt;
	mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;
	font-family:"Times New Roman";
	font-weight:normal;
	mso-bidi-font-weight:bold;}
h5
	{mso-style-next:Normal;
	margin:0in;
	margin-bottom:.0001pt;
	mso-pagination:widow-orphan;
	page-break-after:avoid;
	mso-outline-level:5;
	font-size:12.0pt;
	font-family:"Times New Roman";
	color:red;
	mso-bidi-font-weight:normal;}
p.MsoCaption, li.MsoCaption, div.MsoCaption
	{mso-style-next:Normal;
	margin:0in;
	margin-bottom:.0001pt;
	mso-pagination:widow-orphan;
	font-size:12.0pt;
	font-family:"Times New Roman";
	mso-fareast-font-family:"Times New Roman";
	color:blue;
	text-decoration:underline;
	text-underline:single;}
p.MsoBodyText, li.MsoBodyText, div.MsoBodyText
	{margin:0in;
	margin-bottom:.0001pt;
	mso-pagination:widow-orphan;
	font-size:12.0pt;
	mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;
	font-family:"Times New Roman";
	mso-fareast-font-family:"Times New Roman";
	mso-bidi-font-weight:bold;}
p.MsoBodyTextIndent, li.MsoBodyTextIndent, div.MsoBodyTextIndent
	{margin-top:0in;
	margin-right:0in;
	margin-bottom:0in;
	margin-left:.5in;
	margin-bottom:.0001pt;
	text-indent:-.5in;
	mso-pagination:widow-orphan;
	font-size:12.0pt;
	font-family:AGaramond;
	mso-fareast-font-family:"Times New Roman";
	mso-bidi-font-family:"Times New Roman";}
p.MsoBodyText2, li.MsoBodyText2, div.MsoBodyText2
	{margin:0in;
	margin-bottom:.0001pt;
	mso-pagination:widow-orphan;
	font-size:12.0pt;
	font-family:"Times New Roman";
	mso-fareast-font-family:"Times New Roman";
	color:green;
	font-weight:bold;
	mso-bidi-font-weight:normal;}
p.MsoBodyText3, li.MsoBodyText3, div.MsoBodyText3
	{margin:0in;
	margin-bottom:.0001pt;
	mso-pagination:widow-orphan;
	font-size:12.0pt;
	font-family:"Times New Roman";
	mso-fareast-font-family:"Times New Roman";
	color:green;}
a:link, span.MsoHyperlink
	{color:blue;
	text-decoration:underline;
	text-underline:single;}
a:visited, span.MsoHyperlinkFollowed
	{color:purple;
	text-decoration:underline;
	text-underline:single;}
@page Section1
	{size:8.5in 11.0in;
	margin:1.0in 1.25in 1.0in 1.25in;
	mso-header-margin:.5in;
	mso-footer-margin:.5in;
	mso-paper-source:0;}
div.Section1
	{page:Section1;}
 /* List Definitions */
@list l0
	{mso-list-id:1835534394;
	mso-list-type:simple;
	mso-list-template-ids:67698703;}
@list l0:level1
	{mso-level-tab-stop:none;
	mso-level-number-position:left;
	mso-level-legacy:yes;
	mso-level-legacy-indent:.25in;
	mso-level-legacy-space:0in;
	margin-left:.25in;
	text-indent:-.25in;}
@list l1
	{mso-list-id:2125153894;
	mso-list-type:simple;
	mso-list-template-ids:67698703;}
@list l1:level1
	{mso-level-tab-stop:.25in;
	mso-level-number-position:left;
	margin-left:.25in;
	text-indent:-.25in;}
ol
	{margin-bottom:0in;}
ul
	{margin-bottom:0in;}
-->




A-188. Implementing
Educational Change (for Social Justice) in Marginalized Settings
Spring 2002
Mondays 4-7pm
 



Instructor


Office Location


Phone


Office Hours


email address




Fernando Reimers


Gutman 461


496-4817


Fridays 9-12


Fernando_Reimers@Harvard.edu



 
Click
here for MS Word version of syllabus for printing
 
Overview:
 
Changing schools is hard, changing them to change society
is even harder. Teachers work at the same time to reproduce society, to
transmit knowledge, worldviews and culture, and also to improve society, to
enable their students to have more choices and be freer than their parents.
This course is designed on the premise that the hard job of teaching, if it is
to be changed and improved to build a just society, needs effective support and
understanding from administrators, project managers, activists and policy
reformers. This course is for those who want to play a role providing this kind
of support to teachers as they try to help students improve their own chances
in life and thus change the distribution of social opportunities.
 
The course focuses not just on educational change, or even
on educational change for social justice, but on planned change, on change
which engages initiatives and participation from States or, less frequently,
private organizations. The course challenges the view that change where it most
matters, at the school level, simply follows centrally mandated initiatives.
The readings in the course argue that to enable teachers to teach differently
reformers need to develop a solid appreciation of the complexities of school
life, one rooted in a deep understanding of the practice of teaching, of the
links between local communities and schools, of the realities of education as
seen from concrete schools. The course is structured in three parts: the first
makes the case for attention to implementation, discusses the links between
educational change and policy change and offers a range of conceptual
approaches to understand implementation. The second part explores how choosing
a particular point of entry to change schools matters for implementation
outcomes and processes. Points of entry include changing the curriculum,
supporting the professional development of teachers, changing incentives for
teachers, school staff and parents, and empowering parents and communities. The
last part of the course explores the process of educational change, with
particular attention to the politics of change, including the politics of
foreign-funded projects in developing countries, and also the role of leadership
and agency in creating space for progressive educational transformations.
 
While the course focuses primarily in educational change
in developing countries, there are no a-priory assumptions about the relevancy
of mental models and theoretical frameworks to understand change in those
settings. There is as much variation between school systems in developing
countries, and between schools within developing country systems, as there is
between those and schools in early industrialized countries. Some schools and
school systems in industrialized countries are highly marginalized,
under-resourced, poorly endowed and managed. The challenges of improving
schools in these settings are no lesser than the challenges of improving poor
schools in low or medium income countries.
 
The course has been designed from the perspective that
effective change strategies have to be contextually situated, and therefore
that magic bullets or universal prescriptions for how to support school change
should be mistrusted. But in the search for templates to understand what
strategies might be situationally relevant, to dispose a priori of theories and
knowledge drawn from research in different societies is antithetical to the
essence of comparative analysis. Therefore, the readings in this class will
draw from research conducted in developing and early industrialized societies,
from east and west, from north and south. They will be as varied as the
experiences that each of you bring to the discussions. This is appropriate for readings
and experiences should simply be seen as resources to provoke our conversations
and collective explorations in search for ways to sharpen our thinking about
how to support teachers so they can teach disadvantaged children in better
ways.
 
This course will not teach a doctrine or an ideology about
how to make schools better. It is an opportunity for critical dialogue about
the ways of reformers when they try to help schools change. The objective of
the course is to understand what makes educational change actually happen and
reach schools and communities. The course integrates the study of theory with
the analysis of real life cases illustrating critical aspects of
implementation. 
 
Using cases and examples from different countries and
continents participants in the course will examine the role of organizational,
political and social processes in the implementation of educational programs
and policies. The course will give particular attention to issues of school
organization, leadership, teacher collaboration, and the relationship between
schools and communities. A number of alternative approaches to understand the
implementation of educational innovation will be studied. Participants in the
class will develop a critical appreciation of the literature preparing a
mid-term case and a final research studying the implementation of an
educational change program in a country of their choice. Permission of the
instructor is required to enroll in this course.
 
The course will meet on Monday from 4-7 pm.
 
 
Objectives:
 
 
This course is designed to help students understand why
education policies aimed at improving the learning chances for low income
children succeed or fail in changing conditions in schools. Specifically the
course will:
 
1. Familiarize course
participants with the literature on the implementation of educational change,
with particular emphasis on educational innovation and reform in developing
countries.
 
2. Develop the ability to apply alternative conceptual
frameworks to understand the implementation of real cases of educational
reform.
 
3. Familiarize participants with the theoretical and
disciplinary underpinnings of implementation research.
 
4. Develop the ability to write a research paper discussing
the implementation of an education policy to contribute to the literature in
this field.
 
Requirements:
 
The assignments have been developed as opportunities to
exhibit the skills derived from the course objectives. The course requires
class participation, writing a mid term paper analyzing a case and writing a
final paper analyzing the implementation of an education innovation or reform.
 
The mid term and final paper should be done individually,
you may not collaborate with others preparing these assignments. The ideas
presented in these papers should be your own. When citing or paraphrasing the
work of other authors you should follow appropriate rules of citation. All
papers are due in class on the dates indicated below. Plagiarism is a very
serious breach of academic conduct at GSE and it is sanctioned severely. Make
sure you learn appropriate rules of citation and that you are well aware of the
policies governing claiming and giving credit for intellectual work at the
school.
 
In the past, students in this course have
found it useful to form a study group to discuss the readings prior to class.
To maximize your potential learning gains from these discussions, you are
encouraged to form a team with fellow students who have different experiences
and backgrounds to your own, if possible people who have lived and worked in
places other than those you have lived and worked in. Working with people of
different cultural backgrounds will help you develop awareness of the influence
of culture in shaping our views of education problems. This awareness and the
ability to negotiate differences with your colleagues will help you become a
more effective policy analyst working in an international setting.
 
Assignments.
 
1.
All participants in the course are expected to come to all scheduled
classes prepared to discuss the readings (this will contribute 15% to your
final grade). 
2.
 
Regular attendance, punctuality and
active participation are essential to make good progress in the course.
Absences will be excused only when caused by illness, family emergency,
religious holiday or similarly compelling reasons.
 
In this course regular attendance is
not enough to make good progress. You should come to class having done all
assigned readings and having given some thought to the issues they raise. 
 
Class participation provides the
opportunity to practice effective speaking -as well as the ability to listen
and reach closure on topics being discussed. It is an opportunity to integrate
and share the experience of class participants with the ideas presented in the
readings. Comments that are vague, repetitive, unrelated to the current topic
or readings, disrespectful of others, or without sufficient foundation will be
evaluated negatively. Contributions that highlight key aspects of the readings
for the week and that use the readings to explain aspects of the implementation
process using examples will be evaluated positively. Contributions that
identify tensions, contradictions between different readings, that identify
limits of the models advanced by the readings or that propose
conceptualizations that integrate alternative approaches or solve some of the
identified deficiencies will be evaluated as excellent. 
 
3. Write
a case (maximum ten pages, 3000 words) describing an education reform or innovation
in which you have a strong interest. Develop a preliminary interpretation of
the successes or failures highlighted by this case using some of the literature
reviewed in the course up to this point. This case will provide the foundation
for your final paper. You should have sufficient information about this case to
provide a detailed account of the critical episodes in the life of the project
and to identify the intended and unintended outcomes of the reform. This case
should illustrate some questions which are particularly important to you. It
would be better if this case describes a reform in which you have been directly
involved in some capacity. Alternatively you can select a reform which you can
study using secondary sources, including published and unpublished records and
interviews to key participants in the reform. In writing this case describe
what were the policy/program objectives, what process was followed to identify
the need for the policy and to design it. Who participated? How did implementation
unfold? What took place and with what results? If possible provide a timeline
of critical events during the life of the policy/program. Identify actual
outcomes vs. intended outcomes. What unintended outcomes are interesting?
Highlight three to five questions which are meaningful to you. What would you
like to understand about this case? What puzzles you? Half to a third of this
paper should provide your explanation of some aspects of this case using the
readings covered in the course up to the due date. The case study is due on
Monday March 18 and will contribute 25% to your final grade.
 
An A paper is excellent in that it
is carefully written, clearly summarizes the central aspects of the case and
provides a coherent interpretation of the successes or failures illustrated by
the case using the literature reviewed in the course up to this point. An A-
paper is similarly excellent but draws only in part on the readings to support
an interpretation of the events discussed in the case.
 
A B paper is very good in
satisfying the basic requirements outlined above. It may not reflect excellent
writing as expected of A level work. The explanation offered to explain the
implementation of the case may be partial and without sufficient foundation on
the readings covered in the course. A paper with similar characteristics but
showing strong analysis of the case would qualify for a B+. A paper with most
of these characteristics but minor flaws in logic and analysis would qualify
for B-.
 
A C paper shows serious effort to
present a case but difficulty in advancing a thesis that interprets the events
presented in the case. 
 
A D paper will show some serious
effort to complete the assignment but be seriously deficient in presenting the
basic elements and results of the case or fail to explain the sequence of
events presented.
 
An F paper fails to address the
basic expectations of the assignment.
 
3. Write a paper describing and analyzing the implementation
of your case. In this paper you will integrate the readings covered in the
course to explain what accounted for the success or failure of this case. This
paper should have four sections. The first part will review selected literature
on implementation of educational change, you should conclude this review
highlighting one or more research questions which you will answer examining
your case. You can also derive some hypotheses from this literature to be
tested with your case. A thorough review of the pertinent literature covered in
the course will be evaluated positively, including additional readings
pertinent to the topic you have chosen will be considered excellent. The second
part is a presentation of the case itself, you can edit your mid-term write up
to better serve the purposes of this research. The third part of the paper will
provide evidence and discuss its implications to answer your research
questions, you will confirm or disconfirm your hypotheses discussing the data
derived from your case. The paper will offer some conclusions in the fourth
part framed as contributions to the larger body of literature on implementation
of educational change in developing countries. This paper should not exceed 30
doubled-spaced pages. The final paper is due on Monday May 13 and will
contribute 60% to your final grade.
 
An A paper is excellent in that it
is carefully written, clearly presents the four sections outlined above. An
excellent paper offers original analysis and ideas to explain the case or ways
to integrate the literature on part 1. An A- paper is similarly excellent but
is good, rather than outstanding, in one or two of the four sections.
 
A B paper is very good in
satisfying the basic requirements outlined above. It may not reflect excellent writing
as expected of A level work. The thesis it advances may not demonstrate
originality of thought in integrating the literature, but may be a more direct
application of existing hypothesis in the literature to the case. A paper with
these characteristics but showing strong logical and analytical argumentation
would qualify for a B+. A paper with most of these characteristics but minor
flaws in logic and analysis would qualify for B-.
 
A C paper shows serious effort to
identify the main ideas presented in the readings relevant to the case but
unsatisfactory analysis of the case itself.
 
A D paper will show some serious
effort to complete the assignment but be seriously deficient in advancing a
thesis or fail to address potential objections to the thesis.
 
An F paper fails to address the
basic expectations of the assignment.
 
 
Petitioning to register in this class:
 
This
is a limited enrollment advanced course. Students will be admitted if they have
previously taken courses in education policy or organizational theory or if
they have had experience managing education programs. If you are interested in
taking this course submit a brief statement indicating:
 
1.
Your name, School at Harvard and program.
2.
E-mail address.
3.
What difference do you expect this course will make for your
professional plans.
4.
What other courses have you taken or what experience do you
have on Education Policy or Management, Implementation or Organizational
Theory.
5.
What questions are of particular interest to you which you
expect this course will help you answer.
6.
Write a one paragraph summary of a case of educational change
that you might want to explore in the final paper. This may be a case from your
experience or a case you will research through secondary sources.
 
This statement should be submitted
to me by Monday February 11. A list with the students admitted in the course
will be posted in the course web-site (section lectures) by Tuesday February
12. 
 
 
Office Hours.
 
Sign up sheets for consultation during office hours are posted
on the door of Gutman 461 several weeks in advance. 
Reading List and Schedule:
 
We will use two reading sources for the course:
 
1. An online set selected readings. They will be included in
the course web-site in http://icommons.harvard.edu/~gse-a188. In addition there
will be one set of these readings on reserve. 
 
4.
A series of books which will be available on reserve in
Gutman and in the Coop. These readings
are included in the reading packet, these are books we will use often and they
have been ordered for your convenience. The Coop has ordered a limited number
of these books and will return them to the publisher a few weeks into the
semester, if you intend to purchase these books do so as soon as possible.
 
Course-WebSite.
 
The course web site
(http://icommons.harvard.edu/course/gse-a811) will be used to support
instruction in a number of ways. In addition to the readings which will be
posted at the site, outlines for each lecture will be posted, after the lecture
takes place. There is also a site for on-line discussions, which take the form
of a threaded discussions. These provided a forum to continue the class
discussions and all students are encouraged to participate. 
 
Books available on
reserve in Gutman and in the Coop.
 
Corrales, J. 1999. The Politics of Education Reform.
Washington, DC. The World Bank.
 
Fullan, M. Change Forces. Probing the Depths of Educational
Reform. London. The Falmer Press. 1993.
 
Fullan, M. Change Forces. The Sequel. London. The Falmer
Press. 1999.
 
Pandey, Raghaw. 2000. Going to Scale with Education Reform:
India’s District Primary Education Program, 1995-1999. Washington, DC. The
World Bank.
 
Reimers, F. 2000. (Ed.) Unequal Schools, Unequal Chances.
The challenges to equal opportunity in the Americas. Cambridge, MA. Harvard
University Press.
 
Reimers, F. and N. McGinn. 1997. Informed Dialogue. Using
Research to Shape Education Policy Around the World. Westport. Praeguer.
 
Senge, P. et al.
2000. Schools that learn. New York. Doubleday.
 
Tyack, D. and L. Cuban. 1995. Tinkering toward utopia. A
century of public school reform. Cambridge, MA. Harvard University Press.
 
Warwick, D. and F. Reimers. 1995. Hope or Despair? Learning
in Pakistan’s Primary Schools. Westport. Praeguer.
 
You may obtain a copy
of Involving Communities by A. Rugh by emailing
Anas@caii-dc.com. It's free of charge. This is required reading for April 18th
but don't wait until the last minute.
There's no guarantee that they will still have copies by then.
 
Course Readings
Course readings are available online by clicking on the blue
underlined titles in this syllabus or by looking in the readings folder of the
course website. Readings are also
available on CD. Please do not print out
the course readings in the computer lab.

 
Course Schedule
 



Part I


Policy Reform and Change. Perspectives in the Study of
  Implementing Educational Change.
In this first part of the
  course we discuss why implementation matters for policy reform and examine
  the challenges to helping schools change. We also review various theoretical
  perspectives to studying implementation, including the research and
  development adoption models, the implementation of innovations approach, the
  implementation of large scale change, change as organizational learning,
  restructuring and the recent formulations of fostering organizational ability
  to deal with complexity on an ongoing basis.
 


 




Session 1


Monday, February 4


What is policy
  implementation and why should we care?




 


Mazmanian, D. and P. Sabatier. 1989. Implementation and
  Public Policy. Maryland. University Press of America. Chapter
  2. “A Framework for Implementation Analysis”. Pp. 18-44.
 
McLaughlin, M. “Listening
  and Learning from the Field: Tales of Policy Implementation and Situated
  Practice” in Hargreaves, A. et al. (eds), International Handbook of
  Educational Change. Great Britain. Kluwer Academic Publishers. P. 70-84.
 
* Reimers, F. 2000. Unequal Schools, Unequal Chances.
  Chapters 2 and 16.
 
Van Meter, D. and C. Van Horn "The
  policy implementation process". Administration and Society.
  Vol 6 (4). February 1975. Pp. 445-488.
 


 




Session 2


Monday, February 11


Implementing
  Educational Innovations




 


Cummings, W. Low-cost
  primary education. Implementing an innovation in six nations.
  Canada. IDRC. Pp. 21-79.
 
Inbar, D. 1996. Planning
  for innovation in education. Paris. International Institute for
  Educational Planning.
 
Levin, H. 1998. “Accelerated
  Schools: A Decade of Evolution” in Hargreaves, A. et al. (eds), International
  Handbook of Educational Change. Great Britain. Kluwer Academic
  Publishers. Pp. 807-830.
 
Warwick, D. and F. Reimers. 1995. Hope or Despair. Chapter 9. Education and Innovation. Cases
  and Lessons. Pp. 121-138.
 


 




Session 3


Monday, February 25
 


National Education
  Reforms




 


Dyer, C. 1994. “Education
  and the State: Policy Implementation in India’s Federal Polity” International
  Journal of Educational Development. Vol. 14(3): 241-253.
 
* Garcia-Huidobro, J.E. 2000. “Educational policies and
  equity in Chile” in Reimers, F. (Ed.) 2000. Unequal Schools, Unequal Chances.
  Cambridge, MA. Harvard University Press. Pp. 160-180.
 
Lynch, P. and S. Omer. “The
  implementation of the new educational policy in the Sudan, 1970-85: promise
  and reality” Educational Review. Vol. 41. No. 3. 1989.
 
Pandey, R. 2000. Going
  to Scale with Education Reform: India’s District Primary Education Program,
  1995-1999. Washington, DC. The World Bank.
 
* Schiefelbein, E. and P. Schiefelbein. 2000. “Education
  and Poverty in Chile: Affirmative Action in the 1990s” in Reimers, F. (Ed.)
  2000. Unequal Schools, Unequal Chances. Cambridge, MA. Harvard
  University Press. Pp. 182-201.
 
* Tyack, D. and L. Cuban. 1995. Tinkering Toward
  Utopia. A Century of Public School Reform. Cambridge, MA. Harvard
  University Press. Chapters 1 and 2. Pp. 1-59.
 


 




Session 4


Monday, March 4


Supporting school
  change at different stages and for different purposes




 


CIES Conference. Distance
  Education Class. Read lecture and participate in electronic Threaded
  Discussion in I-commons.
 


 




 


Beeby, C. “The
  stages of growth in educational systems” in Heyneman, S. and D. White
  (Eds). 1986. The Quality of Education and Economic Development.
  Washington, DC. The World Bank.
 
Dalin, P. 1998. “Developing
  the Twenty-First Century School: A Challenge to Reformers” in Hargreaves,
  A. et al. (eds), International Handbook of Educational Change. Great
  Britain. Kluwer Academic Publishers. Pp. 1059-1073.
 
Hargreaves, A. 1998. “Pushing
  the Boundaries of Educational Change” in Hargreaves, A. et al. (eds), International
  Handbook of Educational Change. Great Britain. Kluwer Academic
  Publishers. Pp. 281-294.
 
* Senge, P. et al. 2000. Schools That Learn. New
  York. Doubleday. Chapter 1. Orientation (Pp. 3-58).
 
Slavin, R. 1998. “Sand,
  Bricks, and Seeds: School Change Strategies and Readiness for Reform” in
  Hargreaves, A. et al. (eds), International Handbook of Educational Change.
  Great Britain. Kluwer Academic Publishers. Pp. 1299-1313.
 


 




Session 5


Monday, March 11


The slow, difficult
  and painful journey of school change. How does policy matter?
 




 


Darling-Hammond, L. 1998. “Policy
  and Change: Getting Beyond Bureaucracy” in Hargreaves, A. et al. (eds), International
  Handbook of Educational Change. Great Britain. Kluwer Academic
  Publishers. Pp. 642-667.
 
Elmore, R. “Backward
  Mapping: Implementation Research and Policy Decisions” in Williams, W. et
  al. Studying Implementation. Methodological and administrative issues.
  New Jersey. Chatham House Publishers. Pp. 18-35.
 
Palumbo, D. and D. Calista. “The
  relation of implementation research to policy outcomes” and “Opening up the
  Black Box: Implementation and the Policy Process” in Palumbo, D. and D.
  Calista (Eds.) Implementation and the policy process. New York.
  Greenwood Press. Pp. I-38.
 
* Reimers, F. and N. McGinn. 1997. Informed Dialogue.
  Chapter 3. Why Education Policies are so Difficult to Inform? Pp. 43-70,
  Chapter 11 ‘Conducting a Participatory Sector Assessment in El Salvador’ Pp.
  169-166 and Chapter 12 ‘Policy Dialogue as Organizational Learning in
  Paraguay’ Pp. 167-176.
 


 




Session 6


Monday, March 18


Approaches to
  understanding school change




DUE


Case Study
 


 




 


Calhoun, E. and B. Joyce. 1998. “’Inside-Out’
  and ‘Outside-In’: Learning from Past and Present School Improvement
  Paradigms” in Hargreaves, A. et al. (eds), International Handbook of
  Educational Change. Great Britain. Kluwer Academic Publishers. Pp. 1286-1298.
 
Farrell, J. 2000. “Why
  is Educational Reform so Difficult?” Curriculum Inquiry. 30:1. Pp.
  83-103.
 
Fink, D. and L. Stoll. 1998. “Educational
  Change: Easier Said than Done” in Hargreaves, A. et al. (eds), International
  Handbook of Educational Change. Great Britain. Kluwer Academic
  Publishers. Pp. 297-321.
 
Giacquinta, J. “Seduced
  and Abandoned: Some Lasting Conclusions about Planned Change from the Cambire
  School Study” in Hargreaves, A. et al. (eds), International Handbook
  of Educational Change. Great Britain. Kluwer Academic Publishers. P.
  163-180.
 
Lieberman, A. 1998. “The
  growth of educational change as a field of study: understanding its roots and
  branches” in Hargreaves, A. et al. (eds), International Handbook of
  Educational Change. Great Britain. Kluwer Academic Publishers. Pp. 13-20.
 


 




NO CLASS


Monday, March 25


Spring Recess




 


 


 



