



Case Study Abstracts










Case Study Abstracts

Bill Bryant, University of Iowa
Undergraduate American Studies Survey Course
Read Full Case Study
I'm using WebCT as a tool in teaching an undergraduate course called
American Values. Our syllabus, schedule, some course-related Web
links and some of our readings are located on the WebCT site. Most importantly,
we're using the WebCT bulletin board to conduct ongoing conversations outside
of class. I've established five bulletin board "forums" and assigned about
five students to each. Students are responsible for reading and posting
messages only within their own forum. In a few weeks, my students will
use the WebCT bulletin board to begin talking informally with about 40
American Studies students in Hong Kong. In late March we will conduct conversations
jointly with our Chinese correspondents and with a group of American Studies
students in the Netherlands. During this three-week unit we will explore
European and Chinese influences on American culture and American cultural
influences abroad. I'm interested in seeing how our use of technology in
this class affects the quality of student-to-student discussions, how it
affects my ability to facilitate those discussions, and how much the international
conversations will add to our exploration of American values. 




Susan Butler, Cerritos College
Undergraduate American History Survey Course
Read Full Case Study
This case study evaluates the implementation of "Mini-Lectures" into online
teaching of history. This method stands as the centerpiece of dissemination
of information and student interaction in a survey history course, Race
and Gender in American Culture. In the design of this distance learning
course, the mini-lecture combines three basic methods of instruction: a
lecture, a reading assignment of primary sources, and a discussion of the
information. Fundamentally, a mini-lecture is a short written document
that replaces a lecture given in the traditional classroom. Included within
this written document is an additional feature: links to primary sources
on the Internet. These links also replicate my avid use of primary sources
in teaching history. The final feature of a mini-lecture is a set of discussion
questions drawn from the lecture and primary sources. Students are invited
to address these questions by submitting comments to the class, using email.
Taken as a whole, I make the mini-lecture as the set piece of my course
for the expressed purpose of moving away from a "correspondence course
approach" to online teaching. My case study is a critique of my implementation
of these online "mini-lectures." This evaluation demonstrates that the
instructor-centered teaching methods of the lecture and inclusion of links
to the Internet have been successful, whereas, the interactive online discussion
has not. This case study reflects the positive impact of the innovative
technique of the mini-lecture. It also delineates the ways in which I might
need to clarify my pedagogical intentions and address practical constraints
in teaching an online course. 




Saul Cornell, Ohio State University
Undergraduate American History Survey Course
Read Full Case Study
My use of multimedia technology has evolved considerably over the last
few years. In my survey courses I have relied on multimedia presentation
software for several years. I started with PowerPoint and now
use powerpoint for linear slide shows and Macromedia authorware when I
need more powerful animation or hypertext features. At first I simply transferred
transparencies to the computer and now I have recast many issues to take
advantage of the technology. The power of the technology has led me to
move further away from the traditional historians emphasis on the primacy
of print sources. One result of my use of technology is that I now accord
art, architecture, and music an equal place in my course. I have experimented
with non-linear hypertext narrative structures, but the time and effort
to create such materials has prevented more experiments with a more postmodern
approach to teaching the survey. I now post the electronic slide shows
on my Web site. Students clearly like this and make use of it. 




Barbara C. Ewell, City College, Loyola University
Undergraduate American Literature Course
Read Full Case Study
I think I'd like to focus my case study on both of the courses I've taught
"on-line"--the first (which was my original project--Southern
Literature, taught Spring '97) and the one I am currently teaching
(Southern Women Writers). In both courses, I've sought primarily
to discern how well (or if) the dialogic style of teaching I prefer can
be transferred to the Internet. While the first course was designed to
work without face-to-face meetings, the second one has made some traditional
campus classes integral to the course: we meet every third week and conduct
the interim classes on-line, through email and a Web site. In both cases,
I am persuaded of the effectiveness of email discussions, based
on my own perceptions, the relative quality of the students' work, and
their evaluations. One other variable in this experiment in pedagogy is
the fact that my students are primarily working adults, which does, I think,
make for somewhat more independent learners. 




William E. Grant, Bowling Green State University
Graduate American Studies Seminar
Read Full Case Study
Since a number of Crossroads participants will be addressing such nuts
and bolts issues as assessment of computer assisted learning, practical
issues of using the computer in the classroom, and computer aided research,
I would like to take a somewhat different tack. My uses of the computer
are in graduate seminars, so the issues are somewhat different from those
arising from undergraduate classes, even though in many cases I am using
similar techniques (listproc discussion groups, on-line research,
etc) as those being developed in undergraduate classes. I am also interested
in the attitude of graduate students toward the computer as a pedagogical
tool and the role they see it playing in the future of the University as
well as in their own future teaching and research. I would like to devise
a survey of graduate students in our PhD program who have been involved
in the use of computers, either through taking a course and/or using computers
in their own teaching, to compare with students who have had less exposure
to technology. My approach will be qualitative and anecdotal more than
quantitative, my interest more in the range of attitudes and perceptions
than in their numerical occurrences. 




Chris Lewis, University of Colorado at Boulder
Undergraduate American Studies Survey Course
Read Full Case Study
This case study of an introductory to American Studies courses, American
Culture: 1865 to the Present, will focus on two larger questions: 1)
How has using the internet as a tool, both inside and outside of class,
helped the instructor better achieve the larger goals of this course? and
2) How has creating Web-based elements in this introductory course
changed the larger structure and pedagogy of this class?  By answering
these two questions I will demonstrate that the internet can transform
both the teaching, learning, and experience of both the instructor and
the students in American Studies courses. The larger challenge I faced
in redesigning this introductory American Studies course was how to incorporate
the internet as a critical tool that both instructor and students could
use to develop a more critical and analytical understanding of American
culture and society.  How could developing a Web-based component to
this course support the instructor's larger pedagogical goals of teaching
students how to critically analyze, evaluate, assess, and write about major
debates and themes in American culture and society? This is further complicated
by the fact that both the instructor and students are at one and the same
time learning how to use the internet as a course resource and understand
it as a powerful new medium in itself. I will argue that integrating the
internet into American Studies courses helps students better understand
the multivocality, multicultural, intertextuality, and complexity of American
culture and society.  Like Randy Bass, I  believe that the Web
is both a critical tool and resource and a metaphor for understanding the
larger connections that bind America's past to its present and future. 




John McClymer, Assumption College
Intermediate American History Course
Read Full Case Study
I will use the Women and the American Experience course which I
am offering this semester: 
 
Much, though not all, of this course is Web-based. It asks students
to begin with fairly straight-forward show-and-tell assignments and moves
on to more ambitious research projects, usually involving students working
in teams. The course will conclude with student-designed projects which
may, but need not, entail the use of hypermedia. 




Mary McGuire, University of Michigan
Upper level American Studies Course
Read Full Case Study
In my case study I will do a comparative analysis of my use of the web
in a course I taught in 1996 and again 1997. I want to focus on several
points in this comparison. First, I want to examine how I changed in relation
to the different degrees of knowledge and comfort I felt with the technology--and
how that affected my own willingness or hesitation to use the web in my
course. Second, I will look closely at how I changed the course intitially
and subsequently in relation to my use of the web and internet in developing
the course assignments. Third, I will look at student response to the web,
and examine as well how certain web-based assignments were received and
why. Fourth, I want to take a constructively critical position on the kinds
of uses I made of the web in this course, in both years, and contrast it
with another course taught in 1996, which used the web somewhat differently. 




Earl F. Mulderink III, Southern Utah University
Undergraduate American History Survey Course
Read Full Case Study
My project involves the use of electronic mail and multimedia
presentations in the United States history survey courses that I teach
at Southern Utah University. Although barely 10% of my students have had
extensive (or any!) experience with email, I require everyone to subscribe
to a class listserv which is used as an extension of the classroom. Also,
for the first time I am actively using a laptop computer and LCD projector
for multimedia presentations in classrooms that seat nearly 100 students. 




Sarah Robbins, Kennesaw State University
Upper Level American Studies Course
Read Full Case Study
Our essay will review the experience of team-teaching an interdisciplinary
course on 19th-century American women's work that made extensive use of
technological tools aimed at creating a late 20th-century version of the
conversazione.  Our use of technology was intended not only to enhance
the learning environment in general pedagogical terms (e.g., to make it
more engaging and productive for students) but also to help everyone involved
in the class address key interdisciplinary questions, including the following: 
In what ways has American women's work been shaped by technologies? 
How did 19th-century American women work to shape technology and, through
it, the larger culture?  How were 19th-century women's work roles
also influenced by aspects of their social identities (e.g., race, social
class, ethnicity) that gave them different kinds and degrees of access
to technologies?  How did 19th-century women take advantage of and/or
resist technologies in their daily lives in order to try to exercise agency,
both individually and collectively?  What kinds of productive "conversational"
learning can current technologies (e.g., distance learning broadcasts,
computer list-servs)  facilitate, and in what ways might such tools
help us address the goals of 19th-century women's "conversazione" model
for learning, but in new ways? 




Pete Sands, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
Undergraduate American Literature Course
Read Full Case Study
The course which I will give a case from is one which uses real-time, text-based
virtual- reality environments called MUDs or MOOs. In the
course, I attempt to create an intentional community online, and to approach
the study of certain American utopian literary texts by foregrounding
the utopian aspects of this virtual community. I'd like to report on the
course and offer some guidelines for creating and sustaining online communities
in our classes. Specifically, I'd like to draw some tentative connections
between an emerging critical pedagogy of cyberspace and American Studies
courses with utopian literature at their core. 




Carl Schulkin, Pembroke Hill School
Undergraduate American History Survey Course
Read Full Case Study
To prepare juniors in high school to meet the challenges of college level
courses, it is important both to familiarize them with new media resources
and teach them how to utilize those resources to develop their research
and writing skills.  During the first semester of my American Civilization
History survey, I present my students with a series of assignments
designed to do just.  The series of assignments begins with a brief
introduction to search engines and the World Wide Web.  We
then progress to evaluating Web sites with significant content relevant
to American Civilization.  The culminating experience is a research
paper, either print-based or Web-based, in which the student must utilize
primary sources from The Valley of the Shadow Web site to analyze
a significant problem in the history of free African Americans in the United
States prior to the Civil War.  The focus of my case study will be
explaining how I have structured this culminating assignment and what student
response to the assignment has been.  Documentation will include excerpts
from student evaluations and samples of student papers. 




Ivy Schweitzer, Dartmouth College
Introductory Women's Study Course 
Read Full Case Study
In Fall 1997, I co-taught the introductory Women's Studies course, Sex,
Gender and Society (aka WS 10), with my colleague Michelle Meyers,
an art historian and scholar of popular culture, as a Web-based course
in one of Dartmouth's new "smart classrooms." This venue included not only
state-of-the-art equipment, but a special podium equipped with a Power
Mac that allowed us to project our computer desktops, files, cd roms and
internet sites onto a large screen. For many of the classes in the course,
but not a majority of them, we worked from the course website, or explored
other websites and links related to materials in the lectures. 




David Silver, University of Maryland, College Park
Undergraduate American Studies Survey Course
Read Full Case Study
My case study uses the concept of introducing the new technology as its
unit of analysis.  Its goal is, on the one hand, to suggest a number
of key strategies to alleviate any technophobic anxieties held by students
and, on the other hand, encourage maximum enthusiasm among students. 
The case study will be divided roughly into three sections.  The first
section analyzes student survey responses regarding their initial reactions
to a Web-based Humanities course, their thoughts on dropping the
course, and their reasons for staying.  The second section examines
another student survey, this one asking students which methods and strategies
made them more at home in front of the computer, in the lab, and making
Web pages. The third section culls the student responses from both
surveys and draws up a number of strategies for introducing new technology
into the classroom. 




Kathy Walsh, Central Oregon Community College
Undergraduate African American Literature Course
Read Full Case Study
In Spring, 1997, I used a WEB bulletin board in an African American
Literature and Culture class to at least temporarily overcome the lack
of diversity among my Central Oregon students by connecting to a class
at Long Island University for asynchronous "discussion" --over a period
of several weeks-- of a shared subject of study-- Spike Lee's film, "Do
the Right Thing."  Particularly challenging elements of this project
were getting students who were not using technology as a standard expectation
in such a class to "converse" via this medium, and designing and monitoring
a project requiring the students not only to discuss the material on line,
but to collaborate on line, across the continent, on group "essays" capping
the discussion.  The outcome was that my students seemed more comfortable
with both the technology and the course material after this project and
professed to find it a major cause of their engagement with the course. 
Since I am currently having less success engaging American literature students
with out-of-class electronic discussions, I look forward to reviewing this
previous discussion project in order to identify the key elements that
need to be adapted for my current classes. 

The
Crossroads Research and Study Project 
is funded by the Annenberg/CPB
Projects.



 


