


Women and Politics Syllabus 


Women and Politics 
Political Science 4/5
Winter 1998
Dr. Carolyn M. Shrewsbury
Mankato State University #7 Mankato, MN 56002-8400
MH 221D 507-389-6939 FAX: 507-389-6377
cbury@mankato.msus.edu or mail to:
Dr. Carolyn M. Shrewsbury
http://krypton.mankato.msus.edu/~cbury/web/Welcome.html
Note: this syllabus is tentative and the class may choose to reconstruct
it.
Objectives: 

To examine the intersection and interaction of gender, sexuality, race,
  class, and age with politics in the US.
  to become better thinkers, analysts, writers, speakers, and synthesizers.
  to increase one's effectiveness politically.
  to examine how feminist analysis reconceptualizes political science
  and politics.
  to enhance one's research skills.
  to be able to understand and deconstruct politics in the US today.
  please add at least one objective of your own.

Text:  Cohen, Jones and Tronto Women Transforming Politics
An Alternative Reader.
For useful internet resources, see the Resource
Guide for Women, Politics and Policy..
Requirements:
Class participation (35%): You should be prepared for class most days,
engage in discussion, ask questions, share additional information, provide
feedback to the instructor as well as other students, be a leader as well
as a follower in class. 
Graduate students have some additional participation requirements. You
are to lead at least one of the class discussion days (and if you wish include
a mini-lecture). You should help involve all in class discussions.
Essay 1 (10%): This is to be no more than 2 single spaced pages with
the essential theme of how women live. This essay summarizes our reading
from part one which backgrounds the context in which women take part in
direct political activity. It tells us how "woman" is situated
in American culture and society. Draft due Jan 22. Final version due Jan.
26.
Essay 2 (10%): tbd Draft due on Feb. 19. Final draft due on Feb. 23.
Essay 3 (10%): tbd. Due march 17.
Interview (10%): You are to interview a woman involved in some way (current
or past) with politics and activism. We'll talk more about how to focus
your interview. You'll share your conversation with the class in week 8.

Undergraduate Project (25%): You have several choices:

 A more traditional women and politics text is Duke Women in Politics
  2nd Edition. This is available in the bookstore. You are to read it
  and with others that have read it present a class based on it. In addition,
  during the quarter as you read it you should interact with the others working
  on this project to discuss your reading. You can do this by meeting for
  coffee (or whatever) and/or by communicating by e-mail. For the former,
  keep a brief journal of the meetings. For the latter, print out the interchange.
  Construct a web site on some item related to this course. The web site
  would need to contain some original or value-added material as well as
  links to other related sites.
  A traditional research paper on a topic related to this course should
  be based on material from the internet as well as traditional library resources
  including professional journals. This would be between 5 and 10 single-spaced
  pages.
  see me if you have a special project you'd like to work on.

Graduate project: You could choose a more extensive version of numbers
2,3, or 4 on the undergrad list.
Assignments: 
While I will lecture from time to time, this class is based on discussion.
Our goal is to become better thinkers, not just masters of more information.
This means that it is important for you to do the reading prior to the class
meeting. 
Week 1

Jan. 5 Introductions and course overview.
  Jan. 6 Read: Cohen, Jones, Tronto Introduction Transforming
  US Politics: Sites of Power/Resistance. Mini-lecture: Introduction to Part
  One Thinking about context. Some questions from the reading:
  
terms; power; resistance; systemic forces; politics; paradigm; gender
    structures; collective action; accountability; marginalized; transformation;
    social location
    how do the authors see this book as a conceptual shift in poetical
    science?
    how would you summarize the perspective of the authors?
  
Jan. 7 Read: Ch. 1 Jones and Jones Women of Color in the Eighties:
  A Profile Based on Census Data. Lots of tables, graphs, and census data
  can get dry and overwhelming. But there is much to ponder in this chapter.
  Come to class prepared to work in a group to construct a PowerPoint presentation
  (just a set of overheads put together into a slide show) that you would
  give to an intro class making the most important points covered in this
  chapter. One way to think about this is to construct an outline covering
  what you would say to someone explaining the best of this chapter to them.
  Jan. 8 Read: Ch. 2 Mattingly "Working Men" and "Dependent
  Wives": Race and the Regulation of Migration from Mexico. Laws may
  appear neutral on their face, but have very different impacts depending
  on gender and race. The Immigration Reform and Control Act is an example
  of this. Note also how law shapes gender relations.

Week 2

Jan. 12 Read Ch. 3 Stevens On the Marriage Question who argues
  that law engenders marriage and parenting roles in a hierarchical fashion.
  Mini-lecture: Using the internet and making successful searches.
  Jan. 13 Read: Ch. 4 Kwong American Sweatshops 1980s Style Chinese
  Women Garment Workers.Telling a good story is an important skill. For this
  chapter we'll practice story telling. Be prepared to tell a story based
  on some part on this chapter. For information on the internet about women
  and work you might want to start with the Women's
  Bureau of the U.S. Department of Labor.
Jam. 14 Instead of class. we'll meet at 12 at Happy Chef North for
  LWV meeting with Mary Rieder, a Congressional Candidate in 1996.
  Jam. 15 Read: Half of us will read Ch. 5 Roth Women, Work and
  the Politics of Fetal Rights. Two key things to note here. 1)challenges
  to workplace discrimination and the court. Here be sure to note the distinction
  between disparate treatment and disparate impact and the defenses to each.
  2) the ways in which fetal rights are used to define women. How would you
  want to resolve issues raised by concepts of fetal rights? The other half
  are to read Ch. 7 Shende Fighting the Violence Against our Sisters:
  Prosecution of Pregnant Women and the Coercive Uses of Norplant. Identify
  the inconsistencies in state policy regarding fetal health that suggest
  something other than concern for children as the guiding perspective. What
  is that something?
  Be prepared to summarize the chapter you read to the rest of the class.
  Also pick out ten or so quotes from the article that you'd want to share.
  
  Website of interest: Families USA. at http://www.familiesusa.org
  They are very active in expanding Medicaid to cover more children. The
  NARAL site has lots of resources on
  reproductive rights. You might also find the. Ultimate
  Pro-Life Resource List interest.

Week 3

Jan. 19 Holiday Martin Luther King Birthday observed
  Jan. 20 Read: Ch. 10 Banet-Weiser Fade to White: Racial Politics
  and the Troubled Reign of Venessa Williams. Pay special attention to the
  concept of passing,and its special meaning in terms of beauty pageants.
  Also consider an ideology identifying the total person but excluding sexual
  identity or performance.
  Jan. 21 We again are dividing the readings, but instead of discussing
  these chapters, you are either to write a one paragraph abstract of your
  article or to create a list of points from the chapter that help us understand
  something about our general topic of how women live. (Split up who does
  what so both get done.) Bring your abstract or list to class. The Chapters:
  Ch. 6 Badgett The Wage Effects of Sexual Orientation Discrimination.
  Ch. 8 Joe and Miller Cultural Survival and Contemporary American
  Indian Women in the City Ch. 9 Carby Policing the Black Woman's
  Body in an Urban Context.
  Jan. 22 We will share and discuss out essays over Part One on how women
  live. You should have a draft to read. The final version is due on Monday.

Week 4

Jan. 26 We'll meet at the library for a special session with Kellian
  Clink on library resources for women and politics.
  Jan. 27 Citizenship Read: Ch. 11 Benmayor and Torruelas Education,
  Cultural Rights, and Citizenship. The concept of cultural citizenship runs
  though this multifaceted chapter and we will want to consider the question
  posed at the end. Also worth discussion are the ways in which education
  is itself a political act - and the ways in which state support or lack
  thereof of education frames class politics. You might want to apply this
  to your/our situation in Minnesota today.
  Jan. 28 Socialization Read: Ch. 13 Hardy-Fanta Latina Women
  and Political Consciousness
  Jan. 29 Sexual harassment Read: Ch. 14 Pohl Ritual and Sacrifice
  at Tailhook '91

Week 5

Feb. 2 Domestic violence Read: Ch. 16 Shukla Feminisms of the
  Diaspora Both Local and Global
  Feb. 3 AIDS and Breast Cancer Read: Ch. 17 Densham The Marginalized
  Uses of Power and Identity
  Feb. 4 Plant closings Read: Ch. 19 Weinbaum Transforming Democracy
  Feb. 5 Speaker Dr. Verona (Ronnie) Burton MSU Emeritus Professor Political activist 

Week 6

Feb. 9 As we move to a new section on participation, electoral politics
  and movement building Read: Ch. 20 Brown Negotiating and Transforming
  the Public Sphere for an historical look
  Feb. 10 We'll divide into 2 groups one to Read Ch 22 Junn Assimilating
  or Coloring participation and the other to Read: Ch. 23 Alex-Asseson
  and Stanford Gender, participation, and the Black Urban Underclass. We'll
  then share with each other the chapters.
  Feb. 11 This time we'll divide into 3 groups to Read: Chs. 24, 25,
  26 and share with each other
  Feb. 12 Speaker  

Week 7

Feb. 16 Read: Ch. 27 Echols Nothing Distant about it: Women's
  Liberation and Sixties Radicalism
  Feb. 17 Read: Ch. 28 Minkoff Organizational Mobilizations, Institutional
  Access, and Institutional Change
  Feb. 18  Speaker
  Feb. 19 Share Essay 2

Week 8

Feb. 23 Read: Ch. 29 Daly Crime and Justice: Paradoxes for Theory
  and Action
  Feb. 24 Read: Ch. 30 Blackwell-Stratton et. al. Smashing Icons
  Feb. 25 Share interviews
  Feb. 26 Share interviews

Week 9

Mar. 2 Read: Ch. 31 Shah Presenting the Blue Goddess
  Mar. 3 Precinct caucuses meet tonight. This will substitute for our
  class today.
  Mar. 4 Read: Ch. 32 Crenshaw Beyond Racism and Misogyny
  Mar.5 Read: Ch. 33 Petchesky Spiraling Discourses of Reproductive
  and Sexual Rights

Week 10 This week reserved for presenting student projects

Mar. 9 
  Mar. 10
  Mar. 11
  Mar. 12

Final Exam: Tuesday, March 17 !0:15 We'll use this time to share
essay 3.
RETURN TO:

Carolyn
  Shrewsbury Home Page
PS/LE
  Department Home Page
MSU Welcome Page



