

CCUMC Emerging Technologies interest group.  Selected emerging technologies.




CCUMC Emerging Technologies 

News and information on selected emerging technologies. 
The CCUMC Emerging Technologies interest group provides a forum for the study and discussion of technologies which may impact on CCUMC members' futures. 
CCUMC home page
CCUMC Interest Group page
Link page to several technologies to watch in the more distant future, as mentioned at the New Orleans conference.



These are listed roughly in order of the most actrive publicity on the technologies.  Send your suggestions for other emerging technologies to track and for information resources (web preferred) to:
Richard Post - Chair 
Page updated - August 8, 2002





Wireless networks and devices


Key words and Issues  Wireless wide, local, and personal area  networks (WAN, LAN, PAN) WIFI as 802.11b. The new and faster 802.11a,  The compatible faster 802.11g,
Bluetooth , interference between Bluetooth and IEEE 802.11b, interference from other sources using the 2.4 GHz spectrum.  Zigbee chips
Info sources:


"Technology tussle; The three wireless standards duke it out for technical superiority." 

Network World Fusion article May 20, 2002, Network World, Inc.



"Early users laud 802.11a LANs", 
Network World Fusion article May 27, 2002, Network World, Inc.



"802.11a tips, tricks and traps"
Network World Fusion article June 17, 2002, Network World, Inc.






"ISSCC: Philips Talks Up Low-Cost, Low-Power Wireless" 
 Infoworld 2-4-2002 article on the "ZigBee" standard for low-voltage, low-power chips for wireless devices. 




"Taking Control of Your Campus Wireless Spectrum"   by Dewitt Latimer 
pdf version of article in EDUCAUSE Review, March/April 2001, Volume 36, Number 2.  On guarding the quality of and dealing with interference on the 2.4 GHz band used by both WiFi (IEEE 802.11b) and Bluetooth as well as wireless phones, some wireless video cameras, and other devices.


"It's a deafening sound: Bluetooth and wireless Ethernet rush into a noisy head-on collision"  The March 12, 2001 Wireless World column from Info-World on potential conflicts between IEEE 802.11b and Bluetooth which both operate in the same frequency spectrum.


For more on Bluetooth, try the 
 Bluetooth SIG website 




Video /audio servers

Issues: Effect on campus networks, quality of service, open source versus proprietary standards for encoding, decoding, streaming. etc.



Info sources:

ZD Net's special report on open source announcements from Real networks.  
from ZDNet July  2002  
 (See also several related articles linked from this web page. ) 


Digital Video: Internet2, Killer App or Dilbert's Nightmare?by Ted Hanss
EDUCAUSE Review, May/June 2001, Volume 36, Number 3
 Available on-line as a PDF from EDUCAUSE 




Video-data projectors; Remote control systems

Projector issues: Smaller, brighter, cheaper, cost of lamps, standardization of lamps, 
DLP versus other technologies, compatibility with HDTV such as 1080i and 720p., new connectors and control.  


New trends: Port replicators and connections via Cat-5 cabling (RJ-45 connectors included on projectors).  Digital (DVI) connectors, mainly for computers with flat-panel displays.  Component video connectors (YPbPr) in addition to the usual RGB for handling DTV.  Monitoring and control through IP (Internet Protocol). Higher resolutions (such as SXGA-native or better) at lower prices.  Wireless technology in projectors.

Side issues; The move of high-end electronic control systems (Crestron, AMX) toward web-based systems and IP (Internet Protocol).  Cable length and control limitations for DVI.  Returning to push-buttons; the advent of a number of lower-cost remote control systems.

Info sources:

NEC   introduces 3 new wireless projectors The annoucement is titled.
"NEC Gives Users Real-Time Wireless Data Transmission With New Mobile Projectors"


Panasonic also introduced their newest wireless projector
 The annoucement is titled.
"Panasonic Announces New Ultra-Portable Projectors Including Advanced Wireless Unit"


The Projector Central  site has a very useful  projector 
database that lists the specifications and other useful information for most data/video projectors old and new.  
Here is a page showing the various DVI connectors. 

 The  Digital Display Working Group  came up with the DVI specification.





Portals for campus networks

Info sources:
"The Power of Portals; More colleges create Web services that can be customized to help students and professors"By Florence Olsen,

Chronicle of Higher Education, August 9, 2002 issue 

"Portals in Higher Education What Are They, and What Is Their Potential"
by Michael Looney and Peter Lyman
EDUCAUSE Review, July/August 2000
 Available on-line as a PDF from EDUCAUSE 




Hi-resolution document cameras

Issues: Digital output versus analog, better resolution but slower refresh, full-motion at the higher digital resolution is a future trend, 3 chip versus 1 chip cameras, quality versus cost.
Here is a good introductory info source from Infocomm at AVavenue.com 

Buying guide 2000: Document cameras,  Digital versus analog
 



 Internet II

Issues
Faster access, greater bandwidth, cost and who will pay, limited
access
Info sources:
 http://www.internet2.edu/
 http://www.internet2.edu/html/about.html
"These new technologies will enable completely new applications
such as digital libraries, virtual laboratories, distance-independent learning
and tele-immersion. A primary goal of Internet2 is to ensure the transfer
of new network technology and applications to the broader education and
networking communities."

"Frequently asked questions" page.
 http://www.internet2.edu/html/faqs.html

Internet 2: Making the Connection  by Apryl Lundsten and Eileen Flick
 Syllabus Magazine - March 2001.
 Older issues of Syllabus are archived at the following location.
 Syllabus magazine archive.

Written on the Web; The 'Sexy' Technology; INTERNET2 ,  Matrix Magazine, February 2001.
 by Alan Dessoff

  Matrix magazine - check the archives  for the web version of this article.




HDTV and DTV

Issues: Formats and compatibility
Info sources:
FCC information sources on DTV
FCC is the Federal Communications Commission

Although DTV is only one area of study, the FCC also has an office studying emerging (and converging) technologies.  The FCC Technological Advisory Council
Pctechguide.com
has an excellent introduction, and technical overview for digital video including HDTV (despite sometimes annoying ads)




DVD

General issues: Region codes, recorders (DVD-R, DVD+R, DVD-RW, DVD-RAM, etc.), compatibility with HDTV, CSS code cracking and copying, CSS preloaded on DVD-R general disks.  "General" versus "authoring" drives and media.  Production issues. Less expensive standalone DVD-R recorders.
Info sources:
 A nice review of what is required for DVD creation from recipe4dvd.com. Also has excellent set of links. 

 Standalone DVD-R recorders from Panasonic and Pioneer

Panasonic DMR-E20 DVD Recorder

Pioneer  PRV-9000 Pro DVD-Video Recorder

 PDF of the Pioneer PRV-9000 spec sheet 


An excellent introduction, overview, and technical info source to DVD from pctechguide.com.




Frequently asked questions (FAQ) from DVD Review.  More than you ever wanted to know about DVD.







H.323 video conferencing over IP

Issues: Web based H.323 versus older H.320 and other standards, Quality
of Service versus cost.
Info sources:
http://www.packetizer.com/iptel/h323/
http://www.packetizer.com/iptel/h323/products.html




Digitized collections

Issues: Collection development and wider access
One example: OhioLINK's Digital Media Center
 http://www.ohiolink.edu/media/dmcinfo/ 
"The Digital Media Center (DMC) will provide widespread access
to images, sounds, video, numeric data, and other types of media information
for the community and the world. "
 http://dmc.ohiolink.edu/
Examples of content: 40,000 AMICO images - from more than 25 museums in North America
3000 Saskia images
LANDSAT 7 Satellite Images
 Physics film clips




