





Language and Religion, Spring 2002, Indiana Univ.




Language and Religion:
Topics Course E103 (Section #0040)
May 1, 2002


http://www.cs.indiana.edu/~port/teach/relg/syll.html
Link to Oncourse
Click on `IUB' and enter login and password.

Instructor: Prof. Robert F.
Port

Assistant Instructor: Mark Van Dam

Course Goals:
1. To examine ways in which religion and language influence each other:
specialized speech styles (chant, prayer, speaking in tongues, etc), sacred
texts and translation thereof, etc.
2. Learn various ways religions use language to implement religious
tasks and religious ideals.
3. Learn something about unfamiliar religious, although studying the
beliefs of specific religions is only a secondary goal.
General Procedures
1. Be prepared to discuss readings in class. All students
will participate in discussions.
2. Bring the relevant text materials to class (unless on
a webpage).
3. The syllabus will be updated on the course webpage from time
to time.
Other
Basic Information




Weekly Topics

Wk 1 . Monday, Jan 7.  What
is Language? How does it work?
Read:

1. Linguistics for Beginners (online text). Read only the
sections mentioned below:


Start
page:  http://www.uni-kassel.de/fb8/misc/lfb/html/text/startlfbframeset.html

0.
Welcome

1.
Language and Linguistics and all 6 subchapters

2.
Language Universals, all 4 subchapters


2.   Design
Features of Language (Port)

3.   Communicative
Signs:
Icon, Index and Symbol  (Port)


Wk 2.  Jan 14.  Phonetics and Language
Change
         Read: 
Linguistics for Beginners (online text)



3.
History of English

4.
Middle English


How
to Create New Words

Some
Neologisms in English

English
Bible translation for 1000 years.

Conclusion: Languages inevitably change. In 100 years,
it is barely noticeable. In 200 years (think of the Declaration of Independence)
it is easy to see. In 400 years, intelligibility is very seriously impaired
(think of the King James Bible and Shakespeare). In 1000 years,
quite impossible to understand without lots of  training (think of
Chaucer).
Wk 3.  Jan 21.  What
is a Religion? The case of Shinto.

Homework
1, due Monday Jan 28, midnite.  New version posted Jan 24.

Read:


What
is Religion?

What
is Shinto?

On Common Ground. Section
of 3 essays on Shinto.  For this week, I have prepared the OCG
3 essays about Shinto into a text file (called ``The Way of the Kami'',
``Shinto Comes to America'' and ``Purification: Wand or Waterfall'').
I still recommend using the OCG CD since it has a variety of pictures as
well.  I do not plan to do this for the other religion sections, however,
since it was quite time consuming to prepare.
       In general, for each religion
in Section 2 of OCG, the display has the following list across the top: 
`Files, Resources, Bookmark, Contents, Religions' and then the name
of the religion in this section, like `Shinto'. If you click on
this last word, you will see the titles of the essays about that religion.
 Recommended web resources about Shinto. Some have interesting photos.


Shinto pageat
`ReligiousTolerance.org'. A nice quick summary of many features. (about
5 pages)

An Introduction
to Shinto. by Meredith Sprunger (3 pages)

Shinto, with many
good pictures if you keep looking but the text is full of English errors
and typos.

Conclusion:  Christianity, Judaism and Islam share many
features.  All three provide answers to as similar set of questions
(about one's fate following death, about what kind of behavior God wants
to exhibit, about the origin of life and our world, etc). But not all religions
deal with these issues. For example, Shinto addresses quite a different
questions.

Week 4.  Jan 28.  Religious
Speech Styles: Chant and Rhythmic Speech
Read:


Rhythmic
Speech, Chanting and Rhythmic Action by R. Port (9 pages). This article
is an expansion of the lecture materials.   The logical progression
of the paper is from periodic patterns  to oscillations
as the basis for them.. From oscillation to the entrainment or coupling
of several oscillators (eg, mother's body and child-on-swing), to self-entrainment
(coupling one oscillating part of the body with another oscillating part
of the body, such as the two hands), to meter as two or more coupled,
self-entrained oscillators with integer ratio frequencies.

Conclusions:  Humans love to talk rhythmically
and seem almost unable to avoid it.   In particular, language
employed for religious purposes is frequently chanted, sung or preached
in a strongly rhythmical way.  Chant appears to be psychologically
calming  and, when performed in unison, actively symbolizes group
solidarity and unity.

Week 5.  Feb 4.  Hinduism:
Role of Chant in the Bhagavad Gita.
Homework
2, due Tues, February 12, midnight.
Readings:


On Common Ground: Portions of the section on Hinduism: Read
all of the Introduction (a set of 13 short essays) and also read
Hindu
Experience, only the 3 sections called Home Altar,
Murti-The
Image of God and Lamp Offerings.   Be sure to look
at the associated photographs too.  And read other sections if you
are interested.

Child's Intro
to Hinduism.
This poses a series questions by a hypothetical American-born child
of Hindu parents about the religions along with `mother's' short answers
(by Gangadhar Choudhary). From the lefthand window, please read the Introduction,
and nine of the questions and answers (each on a difft page): Question
1 through Question 9.

`Some simple
mantras, if you are just starting out', by Thomas Ashley-Farrand. 
Listen to the short recording  of `Om Sri Rama, Jaya Rama, Jaya jaya
Rama' http://www.hindunet.org/hindu_pictures/GodandGodesses/god.shtml

Recommended sites:


Picture
collection of some Hindu gods, selected by RP

Week 6-7. Feb 11- Feb 20.   
Buddhism in General and in Tibet.
February 13, Midterm1. Study
Guide for first midterm.
Readings

On Common Ground:  Given the large amount of material
on Buddhism in OCG, you should find OCG/America's Many Religions/Buddhist.
At top bar, click on `Buddhism' and see 9 essays. Read (1) 
all of the Introduction only which has 10 short essays within it,
from Path of Awakening through Vajrayana.   Then,
(2) read Issues for Buddhists in America, but only the essays called
Two
Buddhisms or One and Difficulties of a Monk.



Introduction
to Tibetan Buddhism

Mind, Body and Buddha

Other recommended sites.


General Information about
Tibet

Treatment
of Death in Tibetan Buddhism

Other Tibetan Buddhism Sites

Relation
to Traditional Tibetan Religion

The Body, Speech and
Mind of a Buddha

Week 8.  Feb  25, 27.
Zen Buddhism and Language
1.  Language  is intrinsically vague, imprecise and ambiguous.
2.  Western thinking about the discrete nature of the world
is false and misleading.
Lecture Notes


Bolinger
on imprecision in language.

Linguistic
distortion of reality: Defending Zen on language (by R. Port)

Zen
notes (Port's lecture notes)

The Koan
Page (by R. Port)

Required Reading.


`What do
Buddhists mean by emptiness?'

`Do
thoughts ever stop?' [Or my
local copy here.]

`How to
sit in Zen.'
Recommended


Excerpts
from Tao Te Ching  (4 of 81 Verses)

Zen
approach to swordplay   (A couple paragraphs from D. T. Suzuki
`Zen and Japanese Culture', 1936)

Homework
Assignment done in Disc on Feb 28/Mar 1.
Week 9  March 4-6, [Break]. Writing
and the Great Philosophers;  A Start on Islam


History
of Writing (Lecture notes from March 4)

Week 10, 11.  March 18, 20, 25 27. 
Islam and the Koran
Readings (partial, more to come):
On Common Ground: Under Islam,  read
the Introduction parts 1-5 (skip 6 on Sunni vs. Shi'a),
then read 7 (Sufism), 9  (5 Pillars), and 12 (Resurgence
and Migration).  Then under Issues for Muslims,
read paragraphs 1, 2, 5 ( Prison Ministry) and 6 (Struggling
against stereotypes).


Islam
Notes

Sufism

Recommended
 Introduction
to Islam. (a website at ReligiousTolerance.com

April 8. Second Midterm   Review
Sheet for Second Midterm.
Week 12.  April 1.  
Christianity in the America Colonies: The Great Awakening (1730-1750)


Read:



Christianity
Notes

Revivalism
Notes

Jonathan Edwards ``Sinners
in the Hands of an Angry God'' (sermon excerpt)

Jonathan Edwards ``Letter
about Revival of Religion in Northampton, 1736-1742'' (excerpt)


Week 13.  April 8, 10.  
Some Modern Protestant Religious Services
Monday, April 8. Second Midterm.
Preaching styles, hymns, spontaneous and group prayer.
General lecture source: Jeff Todd Titon `Powerhouse
for God' (Univ Texas P, 1988) pp. i, ii; 1-7; 23-48 (a church service:
`Homecoming Day');
Read:   On Common Ground.
Port's Notes on Protestant
preaching and religious services
and on Comparison
of language views across religions.

Week 14.  April 15, 17.   Pentacostal
Churches and `Speaking in Tongues'; Bible Translation
Read: Biblical support for `speaking in tongues' (in
Revised Standard Version): Acts
2 and
Mark
16 (especially the last few verses, 11-20)
Lecture source: Jeff Todd Titon `Some Recent Pentacostal
Revivals: A Report in Words and Photographs' Georgia Review 32 (1978),
579-610.
Week 15.  April 22, 24.   
The Bible, Translation and `Literal' Translations
Read (used in discussion sections):
Comparing
Bible translations.


Scott Munger:
`It's Impossible to Translate the Bible Literally'

Scott Munger:
`Creating a `Clear, Accurate, Natural' Translation'

Port's notes "The
Problem of Translation

Zondervan Bibles, Inc: Scale
of Literalness of Translation.

Conclusions

Recommended: These readings are part of a collection of good
essays on Bible translation by Scott Munger.
          http://www.gospelcom.net/ibs/niv/munger/
Another good reading is by Herbert Wolf: `When
literal is not accurate'.
          http://www.gospelcom.net/ibs/niv/mct/12.php


Review
sheet for Final Exam.

Final Exam 12:30-2:30, Friday May 3 in regular classroom. Sorry,
no early final exams can be given.


RFP . Copyright
Indiana University.


