


German-American Teaching Resources and Units

H O M E

German-American 
Teaching Resources and Units

Contest

National German-American Heritage Month Contest for High School Students  (Materials and contest from the GM Bookchest)

Teaching Resources

All About Saint Nicholas, Web page by Steven 
    Schmidt; contains a history, story, and poem 
  Brothers in the Storm: The Story 
    of the Sudetenland (information about the video) 
  Deutsche Kultur in Amerika, 
    syllabus by Dr. Giles R. Hoyt, IUPUI 
  The Dream Spinner: A Film Saga 
    of the Germans in Missouri- Gottfried Duden and followers (information 
    about the video) 
  Elderhostels: Teaching 
    and Learning with Americans of German Descent, article by Eberhard and 
    Ruth Reichmann 
  German-American 
    Internet Scavenger Hunt
 German-Americana, 
    Web site by Robert Shea; contains lots of references and resources 
  German-Canadians. A 
    Scattering of Seeds: The Creation of Canada. Film series on the contribution 
    of immigrants to Canada. This Internet site contains introductory matter and 
    includes teaching units. There are three episodes relating to German-Canadians: 
    
The 
        Impossible Home: Robert Kroetsch and his German Roots - Episode 9 
      Copyright: 
        Leonard Frank (photographer; German-Jewish immigrant) - Episode 30 
      For 
        the Love of God: The Mennonites and Benjamin Eby - Episode 4 
    
The 
    German Fairy Tale Road (This is a collaborative project with its focus 
    on the fairytales of the Grimm Brothers.) 
  German Immigrant Culture in America, syllabus 
    by Dr. Peter C. Merrill 
  German Immigrants 
    in the USA: What became of the Revolutionaries of 1848?
German Language School 
    Conference, the national umbrella organization for private German language 
    schools to assist these schools providing quality education 
  Germantown, Pennsylvania, by Betty Randall 
  Germany and 
    America in the 20th Century: A Hypertext Timeline
Goethe Institute -- Index 
    to Distance Education Courses
Inter-nationes Materials 
    for Schools (all levels) - in English or German. Not specifically designed 
    for German-American studies, but many useful resources such as language maps. 
  Kickapoo High School 
    German Links
19th-Century Christmas: 
    Aspects of the Antebellum Christmas 
  Teaching German 
    Americana with Assistance from the Web, article by Giles R. Hoyt and Robert 
    J. Shea 
  zur Oeveste Letters 
    (German ed.), letters with historical context from a German-American, Indiana 
    farmer to his relatives in Germany. 

Teaching Units

Auswanderung aus Europa - Einwanderung in die USA: A project by the Graf 
    Zeppelin Gymnasium, Friedrichshaven and the North County High School in Baltimore; 
    all in German 
    
 Projekthauptseite

Fortlaufend aktualisiertes 
    Recherche-Werkzeug zum Thema "Revolution 1848/49"; all in German 
  Freiheit ohne Grenzen 
    - die Revolution 1848/49 im Dreilaendereck (Deutschland, Schweiz, Frankreich) 
    mit Schuelerwettbewerb; ein Project des Kant Gymnasiums in Weil am Rhein; 
    all in German 
  German-Americans and Their Contributions 
    to the American Mainstream Culture:
    German Names and Words

"German Names in the Hoosier Mainstream Culture," 
        by Tiffany Obenchain, German student at Carmel High School, Winner of 
        the 1997 Indiana German Heritage Society's Student Essay Competition 
    
German Immigration and Famous German-Americans: German-American Day Teaching 
    Unit 
    
Teacher's Guide
Video Checklist
Extra Credit Projects
Quiz

German 
    Immigrants: Their Contributions to the Upper Midwest The Library of Congress, 
    American Memory Fellows Program
Learning About Our World: Germany 
    
Unit 10. December Celebrations
Unit 16. America, Here We Come
Unit 19. Emigration and Immigration
How Well Do You Know The 
        Amish? Activities, games and quizzes by May Ping Soo Hoo 
    
 Historische 
    Epochen
History's Influence on German-American Culture, 
    a teaching unit by Rob Williams 
  Die 
    Russlanddeutschen (currently in German only, English version is planned) 
   Schuelerergebnisse



 Return to Max Kade/SGAS Home Page






Created: 17 December 1997, ARK
Updated: 05 February 2002, WJP
Comments: Dolores J. Hoyt,
dhoyt@iupui.edu
This
home page sponsored and maintained by IUPUI University
Libraries.
URL: http://www.ulib.iupui.edu/kade/teaching.html





IUPUI University Library




IUPUI Home Page





