



Math 307=COMPSCI 367/567, Cryptology I















 Next: About this document ...




Math 307=COMPSCI 367/567, Cryptology I
Randall Holmes




Instructor:
M. Randall Holmes


Schedule:
Math 307, section 1, meeting 2:40-4:30 pm TTh in MG 104.


Office and Hours:
Office: Math/Geology 240A.  Hours: To be
determined after consulting you all.  See ``open office policy'' below.  


Telephone:
My office telephone number is 3011 (426-3011 from
off-campus).  My home telephone number is 345-2899: students are
welcome to call me but please no calls after 8:30 pm any day or
between 6 pm Friday and noon Sunday.
Electronic Information:

e-mail:  holmes@math.boisestate.edu

WWW (web page):  http://math.boisestate.edu/~holmes
I read my e-mail constantly and respond promptly.


Resources for this class, such as a directory of public keys and
message board, will be maintained on my site.


Title of Course:
Math 307, Cryptology I.  The catalog
description reads: ``Introduction to modular arithmetic.  The study of
the RSA, El-Gamal, Diffie-Hellman, and Blum-Blum-Shub public-key
cryptosystems, authentication and digital signatures, anonymity
protocols.  Protocol failures for these systems.  Crosslisted with
COMPSCI 367 and 567''.  Prerequisites Math 170-171 and Math 187.


What we will actually cover is difficult to predict.  Don't hesitate
to tell me about any particular interests you may have in this area.


Textbook:
Cryptography, theory and practice, Douglas R. Stinson.  There
are used copies of this book available in the bookstore.


Dates:
The add deadline (and deadline for dropping without a W) is Sept. 10.


The drop deadline is Oct. 5.  Petitions to drop classes after this
date are usually unsuccessful.


The final exam will be Tuesday, December 18, 2001, 3:30-5:30 pm.


Open Office Policy:
My office hours for these classes are
to be announced.  I will almost always be in my office at the
officially scheduled times, and I will try to warn you when I will not
be.  If I am in my office during a posted office hour, I am available
to help you.


Don't assume that these are the only times when you can get help!  I
am generally in my office the entire working day (I take either the
4:40 or the 5:10 bus home) and I am never offended by a student asking
me for help if I am in the office (though I may help only briefly if I
am very busy).  My other class meets 9:40-11:30 am WThF.


Computer Issues:
Notice that we are meeting in the Maple lab.
I hope that most of you are familiar with Maple!  It is not a function
of this course to teach Maple as such, though I will teach use of
specific features of Maple needed for our purposes.  It is permissible
to do computer work for this class in other languages (though you
might have to find or design your own data types and algorithms for
working with large integers).  You will receive a computer account on
the MG104 machines if you don't already have one.


Exams:
I expect to give at least three full-period exams during
the semester.  I am not going to attempt to predict when they will be
given: you will receive at least a week's warning.  One of them will
be given on Dec. 6, since this is the last day we meet before ``dead
week''.  There will be a cumulative final exam.  


Some or all exams may have a take-home component.


Homework and Projects:
I expect to assign some homework
assignments from the book and some computer projects of my own design.
Students are encouraged to propose projects of their own design; I
don't guarantee to accept such projects but I will be willing to
consider your suggestions.  I reserve the right to take your project
proposal and assign it to everyone!


Provisional Formula for Course Grade:
I am thinking at this point
of making the total homework grade equivalent to one test grade, the
total project grade equivalent to one test grade, and the final exam
equivalent to two full-period exams.  The final exam may replace the
lowest of the other grades if this helps you.  This scheme may be
modified depending on how the class actually goes.


Academic Honesty:
Collaboration on homework is expected and
even encouraged in this class.  This does not mean copying of
homework.  Collaboration on exams or major projects is of course not
allowed (or is restricted to team members in the case of collaborative
projects).  The penalty for cheating (defined as looking at another
student's paper, unauthorized use of books or notes during an exam, or
plagiarism of project work) will be a grade of zero (0) on the
relevant exam or project.  A repeat offense will mean an F in the
course.


Definitions:
The word ``yesterday'' is defined to mean the previous
class session; the word ``tomorrow'' is defined to mean the next class session,
unless I specifically say otherwise :-)






 

About this document ... 









 Next: About this document ...


Randall Holmes
2001-08-29



