



Sociological Theory Robert Wood




Sociological Theory

      Robert Wood

Reading 
        Guide
Syllabus Section I: 
        
        What is Sociological Theory?









 Collins and Makowsky, The Discovery 
  of Society, Introduction

1. The key thing that Collins and Makowsky are trying to

explain in this introduction is why it took so long for sociology to develop,

and why obstacles to sociology's acceptance and development continue to exist.

They note that the development of sociology has involved "a long and

arduous effort" and that while sociology "is not an impossible

science, it is a very difficult one."
Why is this? Why did it take so long for sociology to emerge

as an independent science? Why did sociology emerge when and where it did (in

nineteenth century Europe)? What "illusions" had to be overcome in

order for sociology to come into being? What were the key discoveries that

helped people overcome these illusions? Be prepared to discuss these questions.
2. What is the importance of the

fact/value distinction for sociology?
3. What are C&M talking about 
  when they refer to psychological reductionism and the misconceptions that a 
  too-literal identification with the physical sciences can engender? Why do they 
  consider these illusions?



Collins and Makowsky, 
      Ch. 1: The Prophets of Paris


Chapter 1 introduces you to two rather eccentric 
  Frenchmen who played an important role in laying out an early vision for sociology: 
  Saint- Simon and Comte.  Here are some discussion questions to consider.
1. Collins and Makowsky quote at length on 
  pp. 22-23 from what has become known as Saint-Simon's "Parable of the Idlers."  
  What was the key sociological point Saint-Simon was making in this passage?
2. What do Collins and Makowsky mean when they 
  say that Saint-Simon developed what came to be known as the "ideology of 
  industrialism"?
3. What did Comte's positivism consist 
  of?
4.  What were the key elements of his 
  theory of society and social change?
5. Why do Collins and Makowsky consider Comte's 
  legacy so mixed?



Jonathan 
      H. Turner, "Toward a Social Physics: Reducing Sociology's Theoretical 
      Inhibitions," in Classical Sociological Theory: A Positivist's Perspective 
      (1993)


This carefully-argued and controversial 
  chapter is not an easy read, but it lays out the issues well and provides a 
  sophisticated perspective on sociological theory from a positivist perspective. 
  There's almost as much to be gained by reading between the lines as from the 
  text itself, so read it carefully and make notes on what you don't understand. 
  Be thinking about the relationship between Turner's position and Comte's.
1. What is Turner's view of the existing 
  state of sociological theory? Why is he so critical? What does he mean when 
  he says that sociologists "have lost the early vision of our first masters" 
  and that sociologists "all too frequently achieve statistical significance 
  on insignificant matters?"
2. What are the characteristics of 
  each of the "theoretical strategies" in sociology that Turner identifies? 
  Why does he criticize the first four and defend the fifth? What assumptions 
  about the social world and about theory does Turner make? Do they seem valid 
  dto you?
3. What "inhibitions" does 
  Turner see to his brand of theorizing and how does he criticize them? Do you 
  agree with his position?
4. What makes Turner's position a 
  positivist one? What makes such a position controversial?
Jonathan Turner and Leonard Beeghley, 
  "Social Thought and Sociological Theory," in  The Emergence of Sociological 
  Theory (1981) 

The Turner and Beeghley chapter is not easy reading either, 
  but it supplements the previous reading usefully. I have assigned it in order 
  to explore what sociological theory consists of, and to what goals theorists 
  should aspire.  Here are several things to be looking for:


1) The first concerns the building blocks of theories:

    concepts, classifications, and propositions. These are the formal

    constituent elements of all theories, and you should understand what they

    involve and how they relate to each other. You should be familiar as well

    with the three types of theoretical explanation (classification, causal

    modeling, axiomatic) that Turner and Beeghley discuss.
2) The second involves the kind of theory

    sociologists should aspire to. Here Turner and Beeghley go out on a limb,

    taking a quite controversial view in their endorsement of axiomatic

    explanations. As we will discuss in class, this view places them in the

    tradition of positivism, which argues that the social sciences should

    emulate the natural sciences as much as possible. Try to think about the

    pros and cons of this point of view.  Understand what Turner and

    Beegley mean in their final sentence about how sociology in their view has

    "lost the vision of its early masters" and what they expect a

    "theory of the social universe" to look like.
3) A third issue involves the fact that August Comte originally coined the term "social physics"

for sociology.  What was the significance of this?






Robert Wood, An 
      Introduction to Thomas Kuhn, The Structure of Scientific Revolution 
      (1962)


1. The key thing to keep in mind when reading this 
  summary of Kuhn's book is that Kuhn is criticizing what he perceives to be the 
  dominant (positivist) view of what science is and how it progresses. What is 
  the view of science that Kuhn is disputing? Why does he find this view inadequate?
2. What is Kuhn's alternative

view of science and scientific progress? In understanding this view, it is

important to understand the following key concepts:
paradigm

normal science

anomaly
extraordinary science

scientific revolution

Try to draw out the basic meaning

of these concepts as clearly and concretely as possible.
3. What are the basic

characteristics of scientific revolutions? What is Kuhn trying to show by making

an analogy to political revolutions? What examples can you think of scientific

revolutions?
4. Try to think about what

relevance Kuhn's discussion has for sociology. Does sociology fit Kuhn's model

of what science is and how it progresses? What implications does Kuhn's analysis

have for the study of sociological theory?


