

World Regional Geography Syllabus



	


WORLD REGIONAL GEOGRAPHY  

Instructor:      	C.V. Prorok

Course #:	       	G&ES; 105 

Office: 	  	   107D  X2384

Office Hours: 	   10:30-11:30pm MWF  & 4-5pm TR




Text:
World Regional Geography by Lydia Pulsipher & 
       			Goode's World Atlas, 20th edition








Course Objectives:



Students will know and understand: 






1.	The meaning and significance of place:
	a.  by describing the same place at different times in its history
	b.  describing why places have specific physical and human characteristics in different parts of the world


2.	The processes that shape places:
	a.  by describing how forces from within Earth influence the character of place
	b.  by describing the role of climate in shaping places
	c.  by describing how culture affects the characteristics of place
	d.  by describing the ways in which the character of a place relates to its
		economic, political and population characteristics
	e.  by describing how places are made distinctive and meaningful by human activities that alter physical features


3.	How multiple criteria can be used to define a region:
	a.  by describing the physical or human factors that constitute a region
	b.  by describing how changing conditions can result in a region taking on new	character
	c.  by describing why regions once characterized by one set of criteria may be	defined by a different set of a criteria


4.	The distribution of major physical and human features of the world:
	a.  by identifying the locations of countries, their capitals, and other cultural features
	b.  by identifying the locations of major topographical features 









Evaluation:




These criteria will be assessed based upon unit tests, map quizzes, and class participation.
Six tests will cover each of six units as outlined below.  Each will be worth 15% of the student's
final grade.  A map quiz (see map packet for schedule and study guide) will be given on a 
designated day for each region.  Map quizzes will be worth 15% of the final grade.  Participation, 
which presumes regular attendance, includes question and answer with the instructor as well as
participation in classroom activities.  This will be worth 10% of the final grade.





SPECIAL NOTE:

There are no make up tests or quizzes at any time.

I will drop the lowest test grade and the lowest map quiz grade.  If you miss a test or a quiz
it automatically becomes your drop grade. If you miss more than one test then you must
take the comprehensive final exam (which will be worth 45% or three test grades). There
are no exceptions.  If you miss more than one map quiz then you will have to absorb the
"0" mark. It is in your best interest to take all of the tests and quizzes so that a poor
showing on one of them does not adversely affect your grade.  Do not waste your drop grades!!! 




Unit Test Dates: 


1) January  31st:           
Chapters 1 & 4 
2) February 16th:          Chapters 2 & 5
3) March    05th:             
Chapter  3
4) March    30th:             
Chapters 6 & 7
5) April    18th:                
Chapters 8 & 9 (except the section on Japan)
6) May      04th:                
Chapters 10 & 11 (this includes the section on Japan from ch. 9)



Map Quiz Dates:


1)	January 22nd          Europe
2)	Februar  2nd           
Northern Eurasia
3)	Februar  9th            
North America
4)	Februar 19th           Middle America
5)	Februar 28th           South America
6)	March   19th            
SubSaharan Africa
7)	March   26th            
North Africa/Southwest Asia
8)	April    2nd               
South Asia
9)	April    9th                
East Asia
10)	April   20th            
Southeast Asia
11)	April   27th            
Pacific



Course Outline:


I.	Definition of Geography
	A.	Approaches to the Study of Geography
		1.  Techniques
		2.  Topical or Systematic Approach
		3.  Regional or Area Studies Approach
			a.  Identifying Regions
			b.  Conceptualizing Formal Regions
				1)  Homogeneity
				2)  Spatial System
				3)  Cultural Construction
				4)  Scale
			c.	Classifying Regions by scale
				1)  Culture Realms
				2)  Culture Regions
				3)  Cultural sub-Regions

	B.	Using your Atlas
		1.	Gazetteer
		2.	Types of Maps






II.	Each unit includes two macro-regions, or cultural realms, and I will follow a similar pattern in
	presentation for each one.  After each lecture quiz is given, I will introduce the new unit. Then,
	on the first day that each macro-region is studied, a map quiz on selected place names will be
	given.  Within each unit, a representative physical or environmental characteristic will be covered, 
	and/or a representative human-based, or cultural, characteristic will be presented.  The study of
	each area will culminate in a multi-media presentation depending on the availability of appropriate materials.



It is essential that students maintain an excellent
 attendance record since all materials for the course are presented in class in conjunction with the atlas. 


 Please bring your atlas to every class meeting.

QUIZ PACKET AND SCHEDULE



Do not miss a quiz!


It is to your advantage that you take all quizzes in that they prepare
you for material on the lecture quizzes, and they assist in understanding
class material. Do not miss a quiz because there are absolutely no
make-up quizzes. I will drop the lowest quiz score to determine your quiz
grade. If you miss a quiz you must take it as a dropped grade. All quizzes
will be on place locations for the major culture realms of the world. 


Map Quiz Areas:



1.	Europe (From Iceland to Greece and Poland to Portugal)

2.	Northern Eurasia  (Former Soviet Union: from Estonia to Belarus to
					 Moldavia to Armenia to Turkmenistan to Russia)

3.	Anglo-North America (United States and Canada)

4.	Middle America (Mexico, Central America, Caribbean Basin)
5.	South America (From Columbia to Argentina)
6.	Sub-Saharan Africa (Africa: from the Sahara Desert southwards)
7.	North Africa/Southwest Asia (Saharan Africa to Turkey to Afghanistan
							and back to the Arabian Peninsula)
8.	South Asia (Pakistan to Bangladesh to Sri Lanka)

9.	East Asia (China, Mongolia, Taiwan, Hong-Kong, and the Koreas)

10.	Southeast Asia (Myanmar/Burma to Indonesia to the Philippines)
11.	Pacific (Japan, Australia, New Zealand and Pacific Island Groups)

At the beginning of class we will have a short oral quiz,
whereby I pass out a blank map (just like the one on the web site)
and ask you to identify 10 place names from the list by placing the 
number in the correct location. Duplicate numbers and numbers that
cross boundaries are wrong. Quizzes are strictly marked.  You can
prepare for the quizzes by looking up the place names in advance and
transferring them to the blank maps.  Please do not use red or pink
ink when taking the quiz, and do not write the name of the place on
the quiz map. If you need any help, please see me.
PLACE NAMES LIST

1.  Europe: countries and capitals, Atlantic Ocean, North Sea, Baltic Sea, Gulf of Bothnia,
	Irish Sea, Mediterranean Sea, Adriatic Sea, Aegean Sea, Bay of Biscay, English
	Channel, Straits of Gibraltar, Alps, Pyrenees, Carpathian Mountains, Thames, Seine,
	Rhine, Danube, Po Rivers, Sicily
	
	
2.  Northern Eurasia: countries and capitals, Atlantic, Arctic and Pacific Oceans, Barents
	Sea, Sea of Okhotsk, Sea of Japan, Caspian, Black, White, and Baltic Seas, Gulf of
	Finland, Ural, Caucasus, Tien Shan Mountains, Volga, Lena, Ob, Dnieper Rivers,
	Kamchatka Peninsula, Siberia, St. Petersburg.
	
3.  Anglo-North America: countries and capitals, States and Provinces, Great Lakes,
	Hudson Bay, Pacific, Atlantic & Arctic Oceans, Gulf of Mexico, Rocky, Appalachian
	Mountains, Mississippi, Missouri, Ohio, Mackenzie Rivers, St. Lawrence Seaway,
	Mojave Desert.

4.  Middle America: countries and capitals, Pacific and Atlantic Oceans, Caribbean Sea,
	Lago de Nicaragua, Gulf of Mexico, Golfo de Panama, Istmo (Isthmus) de
	Tehuantepec, Sierra Madre Oriental, Sierra Madre Occidental, Sierra Maestra, Puerto
	Rico, Panama Canal, Yucatan Peninsula, Baja Peninsula, Rio Grande (major river),
	Lesser Antilles, Greater Antilles

5.  South America: countries and capitals, Pacific and Atlantic Oceans, Caribbean Sea,
	Drake Passage, Estrecho de Magallanes (Straits of Magellan), Andes Mountains,
	Brazilian Highlands, Guiana Highlands, Patagonia, Pampas, Lake Titicaca, Amazon,
	Parana, Orinoco Rivers, Atacama Desert
	
6.  Sub-Saharan Africa (south of the Tropic of Cancer): countries & capitals, Atlantic and
	Indian Oceans, Gulf of Guinea, Mozambique Channel, Red Sea, Lake Victoria, Niger,
	Congo (Zaire), Nile Rivers, Ethiopian Plateau, Drakensberg Mountains, Sahara and
	Kalahari Deserts
	
7.  North Africa/Southwest Asia: countries and capitals, Indian Ocean, Mediterranean, Red,
	Black, Caspian, Arabian Seas, Persian Gulf, Gulf of Aden, Gulf of Oman, Straits of
	Hormuz, Atlas and Hindu Kush Mountains, Plateau of Iran, Nile, Tigris, Euphrates,
	Jordan Rivers, Suez Canal, Mecca, Istanbul, Sahara Desert, Ar Rub' al Khali

8.  South Asia:  countries and capitals, Indian Ocean, Arabian Sea, Gulf of Mannar, Palk
	Strait, Bay of Bengal, Himalaya, Karakoram, Hindu Kush Mountains, Western Ghats,
	Eastern Ghats, Nilgiri Hills, Deccan Plateau, Indus, Ganges, Brahmaputra Rivers,
	Mumbai (Bombay), Calcutta, Chennai (Madras), Karachi, Great Indian Desert (Thar),
	Mt. Everest.
	
9.  East Asia: countries and capitals, Gulf of Tonkin, South China, East China & Yellow
	Seas, Sea of Japan, Taiwan Strait, Korean Peninsula, Tibetan Plateau, Himalaya,
	Tien Shan Mountains, Yangtse and Huang Ho Rivers, Gobi Desert, Hong Kong,
	Shanghai, Great Wall, Shikoku, Honshu, Hokkaido, Kyushu, Pacific Ocean,
	Chunchon, Kyongju

10.   Southeast Asia:  countries and capitals, Indian & Pacific Oceans, Gulf of Tonkin, South
	China Sea, Andaman, Philippine, Celebes, Java and Sulu Seas, Gulf of Thailand,
	Straits of Malacca, Annamese Cordillera, Mekong, Irrawaddy, Chao Phraya Rivers,
	Mindanao, Kalimantan, Java, Sumatra, Borneo

11.  Pacific: Japan/Tokyo, Australia/Canberra, New Zealand/Wellington, Papua New
	Guinea/Port Moresby, Fiji/Suva, Tasmania, Great Sandy Desert, Murray River, Great
	Dividing Range, Sydney, Melbourne, Perth, Outback, Great Victoria Desert, North
	Island, South Island, Auckland, Christchurch, Kyushu, Shikoku, Hokkaido, Honshu,
	Kobe/Osaka, Kyoto, Pacific Ocean, Indian Ocean, Sea of Japan, Tasman Sea, Hawaii

carolyn.prorok@sru.edu



Return to Carol's index page....


Go to Department of Geography and Environmental Studies Homepage


This homepage last updated  2/01


