


West Bank WWW Starter Kit





A WWW Starter kit for learning about the West Bank



Syllabus


Middle East
         Links


The Negotiation
         Project


The Negotiation
         Documents


Levels of
         Analysis


The A
         paper


Class Main Page




I hope these links will help you begin your exploration of your
clients in the social conflict class. There is certainly a lot of
information on the web about the Middle East, and particularly about
the West Bank. I try to make the most useful of that information
available here. In addition to this information, you will need to
consult the 
list of reference material the Rolvaag LIbrary has available.
However, don't make the mistake of using the web as your primary
resource. For some things, it's great; for other things, you are
better off spending some time in the reference room. For example, for
late breaking news, some of the news sites on the web are excellent
(e.g. CNN, ABC). But for a sense of the history of the conflict, you
will need to read a few encyclopedia articles, Almanacs, or State
Department reports. For a sense of the religious commitments of the
various sides in the conflict, you are also better off looking in
encyclopedias or other reference works. If you want an already
gathered set of arguments for "your side" the Web is fine, but be
sure to check those facts that are crucial to your argument by
looking elsewhere. If you want thoughtful critique of those
arguments, you are better off going to current political science
journals or opinion magazines.
So, now that you've been warned, here are the links:
Compilations of Links and News etc.
These sites are set up to link you with recent news wire reports,
various newspapers and online newsletters on the issues, sites
maintained by interest groups or organizations, and some audio and
video files (RealAudio is useful here). These and the news
sites are worth checking regularly.

Political Resources on
   the Net. A useful listing of poitical sites, by country.
A compilation of links on the Middle
   East Peace Process.
Yahoo!
   Israeli - Palestinian Conflict
Excite's
   Middle East Update
Lycos
   Middle East

History & Information

Reference
   Documents (maintained by Israel) This site is courtesy of the
   Israel Ministry of Foreign Affairs. It contains the full text,
   along with appendices and maps, of agreements, treaties, important
   letters and memoranda, etc. from both sides. All the relevant UN
   documents are here, the Balfour Declaration, the Camp David
   Accords, the Oslo Accords, etc. Quite impressive.
Palestine:
   Home of History This site has extensive short historical
   essays, biographies, etc. taken from encyclopedias. It also has a
   comprehensive list of links related to Israel and Palestine. I
   have wondered about copyright issues associated with this
   site.
The 1998 version of the CIA
   World factbook. All the basic statistics on countries in the
   world. Look for the Palestine National Authority in the country
   lists under the West Bank and under Gaza.

Sites from Major News Providers
Start here. These sites will provide you with some background
information on Israel, the Palestinian National Authority, the PLO,
Hamas, the issues dividing the sides, etc. They are not "history"
sites, they are journalism. But they are certainly good enough for
you to get a start in seeing the larger picture of the conflict.

CNN
   Struggle for Peace
ABC
   News Middle East Peace Mired in Complications

Organizations on some of the sides of the conflict
Be most wary here, but this is certainly the place to go to find
out what folks on your side of the issue are saying. Remember
that the authors of these sites have a clear agenda. They are not
writing a balanced, textbook-style presentation of the issues from
various perspectives. So, check the facts you get from these
folks. But they are also persuasive advocates for their cause, and
valuable for that very reason.
Israel

Official
   Israeli Sites. A list of links to various agencies of the
   Israeli government.
IRIS: Information
   Regarding Israel's Security. Lots of maps and diagrams.
   Clearly an advocacy site.
The
   Israel Labor Party. The English language home page of the
   Labor Party.
Likud. The English
   language home page of the Likud Party.

Palestine

Palestinian National
   Authority. The offical site of the governing body for
   Palestinians in the West Bank.
The Ministry of
   Information of the PNA has a useful site.
Islamic Association for
   Palestine Home Page. Another clear advocacy site, but well put
   together.
An unofficial site for Hamas.
   More detail here than one is likely to get from official sources.
   Also, the Hamas
   GateWay is an excellent site with materials from many sides
   writing on Hamas. 
Fatah. A major Palestinian
   Political Party
The English homepage of the Palestinian
   Legislative Council, the PNA's elected legislative body.

United States

Bureau
   of Near Eastern Affairs, US State Department.
White
   House search engine for Presidential statements etc.

Online Newspapers and Opinion

Haaretz
   Daily. A somewhat liberal Israeli paper.
The Jerusalem Post. An
   English language paper from Jerusalem.
   
    
Arabic
   News. A broader topic area, but much about Palestine. This
   source seems most focussed on news, with less editorial intrusion
   than some other sources.
Palestine Times. Mostly
   about Palestine from the Arab viewpoint.
Arab View. A
   monthly opinion magazine.




St. Olaf
         College


Psychology
         Department


My Main
         Page


Research
         Projects


Classes


Essays
         and
         Poetry


Links


SPSP
         List
         Search




Disclaimer


