

Arthur Scargill article on SLP




Arthur Scargill article on SLP


From           mspellman@cix.compulink.co.uk ("Martin Spellman")
Organization   Cutty Wren Press
Date           Mon, 15 Jan 1996 22:52:24 GMT
Newsgroups     alt.politics.socialism.trotsky
Message-ID     <DL8vJC.749@cix.compulink.co.uk>



We're Moving Home
by Arthur Scargill
The Guardian, 15 January 1996

Arthur Scargill tells why he is one of the builders of the new party for 
socialists and issues a rallying call for supporters to fight New Labour 

Anybody questioning why I and many others have decided the time has come 
to establish a Socialist Labour Party had their answer from Tony Blair on 
BBC TV yesterday morning. He and his colleagues in New Labour's 
leadership agree that their party can no longer be home to an unrepentant 
socialist such as myself New Labour. he explained to David Frost, is 'not 
some public-relations exercise but a new and different party".

A number of Labour and trades-union movement activists realised during 
the course of the 1995 Labour Party conference in early October that that 
was indeed the case.

At the heart of our unhappiness was the ditching of Clause 4. The 
commitment to common ownership was fundamental to the principles leading 
to the birth of the Labour Party nearly a century ago. To me, and in the 
communities and traditions that shaped my thinking, this aim represents 
an abiding hope for a better world. and is a cornerstone of any fight for 
economic democracy en route to true socialism.

However, the changes to Labour's constitution incorporated in the new 
rule book adopted at the 1995 Labour Party conference went far beyond 
ditching Clause 4. New Labour's constitution has not only abandoned 
socialism but embraced capitalism and the free market. In other words, 
Labour ceased any pretence of being a socialist party

Many on the left argue that it was never socialist, that it was at best 
social-democratic and that people like me were deluding ourselves in 
thinking we could campaign for socialism effectively within it. I now 
accept that argument, and believe that New Labour can no longer be a 
"home" to socialists. The changes go beyond the constitution. On all 
fundamental issues that affect our lives and our society New Labour has 
adopted policies that cannot be supported by those who call themselves 
socialists.

On privatisation, New Labour has not only abandoned a commitment to 
common ownership. but declares it will not reverse anti repair the 
appalling social/economic damage created by the Tories' sell-off 
programme.

On unemployment New Labour has abandoned a commitment to full employment 
with its leader saying yesterday that he could not guarantee that New 
Labour could eradicate unemployment.

In reality. a British government could do exactly that. even within a 
capitalist society - by introducing a four day working week with no loss 
of pay, banning all nonessential overtime and introducing voluntary 
retirement on full pay at the age of 55.

It is economic insanity to pay out UKP10 billion a year on unemployment 
when for half that amount, with the measures referred to above. 
unemployment could be eliminated. Such measures however, are anathema to 
the nature of capitalism.

On pensions, New Labour has abandoned the principle of universal pension 
provision for all citizens, and is examining ways in which workers wild 
have to pay for pension security.

With the National Health Service and our education system both suffering 
from nearly 17 years of Tory government, New Labour is no longer 
committed to the fundamental rebuilding and restoration that both these 
crucial services demand.

New Labour's conversion to capitalism is symbolised by its stance on 
anti-trades union legislation.

At the 1995 Labour Party conference, the delegates voted to repeal all 
the Tory anti-union laws - yet Tony Blair yesterday again declared that 
he would retain that vicious legislation. Such is New Labour's contempt 
not only for trades unions and trades unionism but for rank and file 
delegates of its own party.

Margaret Thatcher failed in her declared intention to wipe socialism off 
the agenda of British politics - and yet we now find Tony Blair and New 
Labour wiping socialism off its own agenda.

This situation presents socialists with an inescapable challenge. 

A representative meeting decided at the weekend that there is no 
alternative to establishing a Socialist Labour Party now. That decision 
followed widespread consultation throughout England. Scotland and Wales 
and the announcement on Saturday has met an enthusiastic response.

The derision and anger in certain quarters at the establishment of 
Socialist Labour is reminiscent of the response given to the founding of 
the Labour Party nearly a century ago. That response was wrong then and 
it is wrong now.

Many respected comrades and friends within the Labour movement have been 
deeply critical, arguing that people like myself should "stay and fight" 
inside New Labour. They argue, also. that any "rocking the boat" can only 
benefit the Tories. Historically speaking. we have been through all this 
before. These arguments engaged those of our forebears who broke with the 
Liberal Party nearly a century ago.

In my home town of Barnsley the first candidate who stood for Labour at a 
byelection in 1897 was not only heckled but stoned by miners. who 
believed that by standing for Labour he was harming the Liberal Party's 
chance of election to government.

As late as 1910, there was still a large body of opinion in the 
trades-union and Labour movement actively supporting the Liberal Party 
and arguing that it was not the role of trades unions to be directly 
involved in politics.

Socialist Labour is born from the frustration and anger of trades-union 
and Labour movement activists who feel disenfranchised by New Labour.

However, this new party is born in a positive not negative spirit the 
belief that only through socialism can we create a peaceful. 
environmentally protected world and bring about fundamental changes in 
society so that work, a place to live, health care and education are 
rights that can be experienced by all.

Socialist Labour will, for example, support all the "single issue" 
campaigns for peace, animal welfare and the environment. Even some of our 
enemies concede that this new party offers such campaigners a natural 
home.

New Labour has ditched socialist principles -- and I urge all socialists 
inside as well as outside Parliament to recognise that fact and join 
Socialist Labour! 



Syllabus/Home | 
Schedule | 
Resources 
Exams | 
Current Event Analyses | 
Grades
Questions? Contact Prof. Monroe at bmonroe@indiana.edu

