  Aircraft Flight Dynamics     Aircraft Flight Dynamics (MAE 331)Fall 2002 Robert F. Stengel Department of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering Princeton University MAE 331 is designed to introduce students to the performance, stability, and control of aircraft ranging from micro-uninhabited air vehicles through general aviation, jet transport, and fighter aircraft to Mars planes and re-entry vehicles.  Particular attention is given to mathematical models and techniques for analysis, simulation, and evaluation of flying qualities, with brief discussion of guidance, navigation, and control.  Topics include equations of motion, configuration aerodynamics, analysis of linear systems, and longitudinal/lateral/directional motions. The course is required for the aerospace engineering program, and it is accessible to all students with the necessary prerequisites (MAE 206 and 222).As presented in the linked Syllabus, the course is divided in two parts.  About two thirds of the course will be devoted to the Science and Mathematics of flight dynamics, and one third will address historical Case Studies in aircraft performance, stability, and control.  Principal references are the draft manuscript for my book, Flight Dynamics, and the book by Abzug and Larrabee (1997), listed among Selected References. Assignments will focus on the use of MATLAB for numerical experiments, on independent investigation of the literature, and on analysis of real-world problems.  There will be a mid-term exam and a term paper.  For the latter, each student will analyze the flight dynamics of a different aircraft type, summarized in a written report and a brief oral presentation.  Syllabus    SELECTED REFERENCES  Abzug, M., and Larrabee, E., Airplane Stability and Control: A History of the Technologies That Made Aviation Possible, Cambridge University Press, 1997.Abzug, M., Computational Flight Dynamics, AIAA Press, 1998.Asselin, M., An Introduction to Aircraft Performance, AIAA Press, 1997.Anderson, J., Aircraft Performance and Design, McGraw Hill, 1999.Ashley,  H., Engineering Analysis of Flight Vehicles, Addison-Wesley, 1974.Babister, A., Aircraft Dynamic Stability and Response, Pergamon Press, 1980.Blakelock, J., Automatic Control of Aircraft and Missiles, J. Wiley & Sons, 1991.Cook, M., and Rycroft, M., Aerospace Vehicle Dynamics and Control, Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1994.Cook, M., Flight Dynamics Principles, Arnold, 1997.Etkin, B., and Reid, L., Dynamics of Flight: Stability and Control, J. Wiley & Sons, 1996.Gibson, J., The Definition, Understanding and Design of Aircraft Handling Qualities, Delft University Press, 1997.Hodgkinson, Aircraft Handling Qualities, AIAA Press, 1999.Mair, W., and Birdsall, D., Aircraft Performance, Cambridge University Press, 1992.McCormick,  B.,  Aerodynamics, Aeronautics, and Flight Mechanics, J. Wiley & Sons, 1995.McRuer, D., Ashkenas, I., and Graham, D, Aircraft Dynamics and Automatic Control, Princeton University Press, 1973.Miele, A., Flight Mechanics: Theory of Flight Paths, Addison-Wesley, 1962.Nelson, R., Flight Stability and Automatic Control, McGraw Hill, 1998.Ojha, S., Flight Performance of Aircraft, AIAA Press, 1995.Pamadi, B., Performance, Stability, Dynamics, and Control of Airplanes, AIAA Press, 1998.Perkins, C., and Hage, R., Airplane Performance Stability and Control, J. Wiley & Sons, 1949.Rolfe, J., and Staples, K., Flight Simulation, Cambridge University Press, 1986.Schlichting,  H.,  and Truckenbrodt,  E., Aerodynamics of the Airplane, McGraw-Hill Book Co., 1979.Schmidt, L., Introduction to Aircraft Flight Dynamics, AIAA Press, 1998Seckel,  E.,  Stability and Control of Airplanes and Helicopters, Academic Press, 1964.Stengel,  R., Optimal Control and Estimation, Dover Publications, 1994.  (originally published as STOCHASTIC OPTIMAL CONTROL;  Theory and Application, J. Wiley & Sons, 1986.)Stengel, R., Flight Dynamics, to be published by Princeton University Press.Stevens, B., and Lewis, F., Aircraft Control and Simulation, J. Wiley & Sons, 1992.Stinton, D., Flying Qualities and Flight Testing of the Airplane, AIAA Press, 1996.Stinton, D.,The Anatomy of the Airplane, AIAA Press, 1998.van der Linden, C., DASMAT-Delft University Aircraft Simulation Model and Analysis Tool, Delft University Press, 1998.Vinh, N., Flight Mechanics of High-Performance Aircraft, Cambridge University Press, 1993.   SELECTED WEB LINKS Tools, Libraries, and Data  MATLAB Mathematica Control Engineering Virtual Library NASA Scientific and Technical Reports NASA Technical Reports Server NASA Langley Technical Reports Server Princeton University Library Human Factors Links Aircraft Design Information: Classical Control Aircraft Design Information: Specifications Aircraft Design Information: Design Issues Related to Vehicle Control Aircraft Design Information: Agility Aircraft Design Information: High Angle of Attack Aircraft Design Information: Aircraft Sizing/Multidisciplinary Design F-18 Model Airborne Trailblazer The Aviation Enthusiast Corner   Aeronautical and Technical Organizations  Information about NASA NASA Ames Research Center NASA Dryden Flight Research Center NASA Langley Research Center Federal Aviation Administration FAA Technical Center Air Force Research Laboratory Air Force Flight Test Center Naval Air Systems Command Flight Test Safety Committee NRC Aeronautics and Space Engineering Board AIAA IEEE SAE Aerospace Industries Association National Business Aviation Association Joint University Program for Air Transportation Research   Publications and OTA Reports  Aviation Week Aerospace Engineering Online Aero-News Network Air Safety Online Videos Safe Skies for Tomorrow Safer Skies with TCAS Advanced High-Speed Aircraft   Corporations  AeroVironment Airbus Boeing Cessna Lockheed-Martin Northrop Grumman Raytheon Scaled Composites     http://www.princeton.edu/~stengel/MAE331.htmllast updated August 9, 2002, stengel@princeton.edu Copyright 2002 (c) by Robert F. Stengel.  All rights reserved.   