





NYU Metropolitan Studies - Legal Aid Internship






















Legal Aid Internship
Internship FAQ
|| Agencies Offering Internships ||
Tips
on Resume Writing || Interview Tips


These links will open in a new window:
Career
Services ||
Service
Net || Community
Service Center
...
Legal Aid Seminar V99.0402.002 Wednesdays 6:20-9:00 (Spring
2000)
Internship Fieldwork: V99.0401.002 Hours to be arranged
6 or 8 credits, Internship: 10 or 15 hours a week
Introduction
Descripton of the Legal Aid Society Internhsip
Syllabus
 
Introduction
This program is ideal for pre-law students or anyone interested in exploring
the day-to-day workings of our legal system, while combining this experience
with the reflection, analysis, and context of an academic seminar. 
You receive 6 to 8 points working 10 to 15 hours per week and attending
a weekly seminar.  Majors must register for 8 points.
In the internship, you'll gain invaluable, hands-on experience outside
the classroom by working with criminal defense lawyers at the offices of
the Legal Aid society.  You'll be an important member of the team
with meaningful responsibilities.
In the seminar, Steven Silverblatt, a supervising attorney at Legal
Aid, will contextualize criminal law with related topics in criminology,
penology, and urban sociology.  You'll analyze and discuss common
problems and experiences in small seminar setting.  Participation
is open to all Juniors and Seniors at NYU.  You must be independent,
well-organized and responsible, but no previous legal experience is needed.
Back to top
Description of the Legal
Aid Society Internship
Founded in 1876, the Legal Aid Society (LAS) is the nation's oldest
and largest provider of free legal assistance in all areas of the law,
including civil, juvenile, appeals, and criminal defense. The Legal Aid
Society Criminal Defense Division provides representation to indigent people
accused of committing a misdemeanor or felony in New York. The internship
at the LAS offers students a great opportunity to gain first-hand knowledge
of the criminal court system by working side by side with practicing criminal
defense attorneys. After completing a group training session on the basics
of investigation, the fundamentals of court proceedings, and police procedures,
interns are assigned to work with several attorneys, who instruct them
on the intricacies of the law and investigation. Office work occupies a
relatively small portion of interns' time. Interns spend most of their
time doing field work which often consists of investigating in poor, crime-ridden
areas of the city. Interns interview witnesses from a wide range of social
and economic backgrounds, photograph crime scenes, prepare exhibits for
presentations in court, serve subpoenas and provide any kind of necessary
assistance to attorneys. Interns also write detailed reports on the success
of their efforts to update attorneys on the status of the investigation.
The Legal Aid Internship is a challenging but extremely valuable experience
that provides interns with thorough knowledge of what an attorney's, and
particularly a criminal defense attorney's, work is like.
Back to top



Legal Aid Seminar: Syllabus
Required: Charles E. Silverman, Criminal Violence, Criminal
Justice
                 
Samuel Walker, Sense and Nonsense about the Crime
1. Outline and structure of the course: 4 point seminar (paper presentation,
and class participation required) fieldwork introduction, emphasizing the
development of symbiotic relationships between students and their attorneys;
journal of activities (15 hours/week>, corrections passes (seeing the reality
of criminal justice from the inside); basic commitments required (confidentiality,
reliability), dress code;
Structure of Criminal Justice System; Criminal and Supreme courts, basic
architecture and terminology of the system; function of the Grand Jury.
Reading: George Orwell, Politics and the English Language
           U.S.
Constitution, Bill of Rights
2. General purposes of Criminal Justice System (deterrance, punishment,
rehabilitation, social engineering, education);
Does the system fulfill the expectations of the public and accomplish
the purposes for which it is intended? If formal "justice" is a legitimate
purpose of the system, how does plea bargaining impact on that purpose?
When administrative needs conflict with procedural due processes, which
should predominate?
In order to appreciate the balance of power in the system, some specific
knowledge of the Sentencing options is required: predicate and persistent
offenders, definite, indefinite and mandatory sentences, and power struggles
between the executive and judicial participants will be discussed.
Reading:Silberman, pp. 169-198.
           
Walker, pp.71-96.
3. Accusatory instruments and Indictments: introduction to documents,
complaints, criminal records, and the process of Arraignment (and initial
client interview).
Students will have seen arraignments with their lawyers and will have
observed numerous bail arguments. What factors determine whether a defendant
is released or incarcerated? How well do we implement the constitutional
mandate of "reasonable" bail? How does poverty impact on the fact-finding
process?
At arraignments the attorney-client relationship is formed. The seminar
will explore the structural components of that relationship (continuity
of representation) discussing the ethics of confidentiality, and the impediments
to trust which the attorneys and his client must overcome.
Reading: Silberman, pp. 3-48.
               
Walker, pp. 36-54.
4. Introduction to Constitutional litigation: the exclusionary rule
and motions to suppress evidence ( Wade, Mapp, and Huntley hearings );
effects on police, public perceptions.
Constitutional litigation on criminal court is frequent and connnects
the law-abiding to the defendant in the same arena. How are the Bill of
Rights preserved by the courts? In a democratic society, should the will
of the majority prevail against the legal technicalities of the exclusionary
rule? The seminar will consider how due process affects the fact-finding
process in eye-witness identification cases, how class and poverty affect
police-citizen street encounters, and how the right to remain silent interacts
with the needs of the law enforcement.
Reading: Walker, pp. 116-127, selected cases.
5. Racism in the Criminal Justice System: etiology of crime, recidivism
(causes and measurements ); bail, right to cousel and the effect of a criminal
record (Sandoval hearings)
Is the Criminal Justice System racist because it deals primarily with
with minority offenders? Or is the system a miror of social realities,
operating fairly but reflecting class and racial animosities? Guest speakers
will help sessitize students to the many ways in which racism (and sexism)
is transmitted in court.
Is the "war on drugs" racially motivated? How is "victory" in this struggle
measured? Do the existance of of drug laws allow us to measure the deterrent
and educational impact of the criminal justice system? Is "legalization"
surrender?
Drug cases form an important part of our practice, so observation and
undercover operations will be reviewd.
Voir dire: Silberman: pp. 87-168 ; Walker pp. 235-245 254-266 ; Black
Robes, White Justice (Hon. Bruce Mc. M Wright)
6. Research paper introduction: structure of oral and written argumnet
(litigation implications); topic selection.
The research paper for the seminar will be on a topic related to the
subject matter of the course, other than one devotedto strictly legal research.
The students will fromulate a reasearch hypothesis to be tested by both
secondary and primary research. The conclusion will be argued before the
seminar as a whole at the end of the semester.
Since picking a paper topic suitable for this project is difficult,
some seminar time will be spent outlining the requrements and refining
possible research, choosing research method appropriate to the proposed
question.
Fieldwork review and discussion.
7. Midterm exam (reviewed in class); Rosario material; investigation,
discovery and game theories of litigation.
Brady material and the prosecutorial function; ethical burdens
of defense and prosecution distinguished.
Reading: Brady vs. Maryland,, 373 US 83 Walker, pp.246-253
8. The truth-serum hypothetical: variables in the fact-finding accuracy
of the adversary system ; the role of the public and the nature of public
pressure on the system.
The electronic lynch-mob: symbiosis between press and the system and
its effects on civil liberties; trials as symbols of racial justice, and
as entertainment.
Reading: Silberman, pp. 253-308
9. Ethics of criminal defense: the perjury hypothetical, litis of advocacy,
"representing the guilty," specific problems in everyday practice.
Labor ethics: individual and collective responsibility of the Legal
Aid lawyer to clients and the system. City politics and defense funding.
Reading: Code of Professional Responsibility
Not only do criminal lawyers defend the least popular members of the
society, but often must defend themselves against a hostile public and
judiciary. What values motivate these attourneys? Does the system serve
the same values?
a) Whan does the attourney's professonal responsibility conflict with
her personal sense of morality? What does she do?
b) What are the ethical responsibilities of the prosecutor? How does
the judiciary encourage ethical conduct by lawyers?
c) If a criminal goes free through a "technicality" who wins? Is criminal
law a "game"? Who makes the rules?
d) Innocent convicted, guilty freed; which is worse?
e) How does Legal Aid relateto the private bar? Are private lawyers
bettre? Who pays for Legal Aid, and why?
10. Prison systems and Alternatives to incarceration: community-based
rehabilitation and special strategies for distinct populations (juveniles,
mentally ill, AIDS).
Architecture of prisons and courts: the physical messages of the system
and its effects on representation.
Reading: Silberman, pp. 371-423; (309-370) Walker pp. 199-234
The prison system is a closed and violent world, into which our students
are afforded a unique peek (without getting arrested). The State Prison
population of Ney York has tripled in the last twenty years, while recidivism
and crime rates remain roughly constant. Are we on the right track/
a) Why are prison recidivism rates so high (c. 75%)? Is the problem
with the inmates, the institutions, or both?
b) Considering the epidemic spread of AIDS in prison, is incarceration
of offenders a socially suicidal boomerang?
c) Is "rehabilitation" possible? In what setting? At what cost?
d) Is corrections a monopoly? Should prisons be "privatized"?
e) How does the architecture of the courthouse influence criminal justice?
Does it interfere with the right to counsel?
11. Criminal Justice as business: cost-effectiveness and plea bargaining;
cost of prison and probation systems; financial priorities in criminal
justice.
Economic models of justice ( equal protection and class analysis); self
perpetuation of the system and recidivism.
Reading: The Behavior of Law, Donald Black pp. 2-63
The criminal justice system, considered as a whole (including court
, corrections probation personell and and supporting services) is an important
industry in NY state and major emplyer. How much justice can taxpayers
afford?
a) Whateconomic incentive does the system have to reduce crime? Is incarceration
cost-effective? Does it matter?
b) Is justice an ideal, or a commodity we can purchase more or less
of? What are the consequences of bying less?
c) Does plea-bargaining turn the system into a marketplace? What factors
influence the "price" of a case?
d) Does the system disciminate on the basis of economic and social class?
How can such discrimination be measured?
12. Selected problems of trial strategy and tactics, including but not
limited to the rule against hearsay, burdens of proof, charge, and appelate
review.
By this point most of the students will have witnessed and assisted
their attourneys at trials of criminal cases, so the discussion will focus
on these experiments and the changes in perception (if any) which the students
have undergone during the course of the sewmester.
13. Paper presentations and discussion.
14. Paper presentations.
15. Paper presentations.
Additional recommended readings will be listed separately, but will
include :
a) 1984, George Orwell
b) The Behavior of Law, Donald Black
c) Rationalizing Justice, Wolf Hydebrand + Caroll Seron
Back to top




 


