


A Question about Methodology (Pedersen Counterresponse)





 
  


Interroads Discussion List


A Question about Methodology
Counterresponse by Vernon Pedersen


Interroads
Table of Contents
3. This thread contains an essay by Vernon
Pedersen
Invited Responses from:

Blair
Budianta 
Mintz
Stowe

List Responses from:

Carner
Finlay
Stowe
Zwick
Linke
Lauter
Horwitz 
Lauter (2)
Kaenel

Counterresponse from Vernon Pedersen
Postscripts from:

Lauter
Horwitz
Stowe
Morreale

Addenda:
Syllabus, The
Americas: Identity, Culture and Power (Mintz)
Syllabus, Introduction
to American Studies (Lauter)

The most important criticisms directed at the program outlined in our
  original posting center around the question of defining what is meant by
  American and then relating that definition to the Bulgarian environment.
  In eastern and central Europe to say American means the United States.
  Programs which want to be more inclusive invariably call themselves North
  American Studies programs. Although, because of the strong relationship
  between American Studies and English language programs in this part of
  the world, few programs that I am aware of include Mexico or Central and
  South America in that definition. However, even if this was not the case
  we would have still restricted the program here to the fifty United States.
  This is in part because we lack the resources in faculty and teaching materials
  to extend our focus but mainly because our students want to study the United
  States. The bulk of our majors will be individuals whose career plans,
  much as Jeff Finlay wondered, focus on business, diplomacy and journalism.
  Another factor affecting the structure of the program, and one which
  I did not emphasize strongly enough in the posted essay, was the committee's
  belief that American Studies, as it is practiced in the United States,
  has lost its way and needs to return to a more traditional structure. We
  all believe that a slightly modified version of the 1950s emphasis on American
  history, literature, and distinctive patterns of communication will not
  only do a better job of helping our students understand America as a nation
  and a people but will in fact present a truer picture of the country. What
  do I mean by that? I mean that much of current American studies seems to
  focus on questions of identity politics and issues of power and suppression.
  In fact all of these things happened, I teach a class here on Native American
  history which makes that painfully clear, but the current over-emphasis
  on these themes has led to a focus on forces which tear society apart.
  But in fact the United States has maintained a high degree of cohesion
  in spite of being a multi-ethnic, constantly changing society, and in spite
  of such violent upheavals as the Civil war or the cultural crises of the
  1960s.
  Questions have been raised about the wisdom of a nationalist focus in
  an international setting (ie Bulgaria) and several respondents discussed
  the need to focus on borderlands and an international context to properly
  understand the American experience. Looking at border areas and international
  settings can be a valuable aspect of American Studies especially in the
  United States where students need to have something to compare and contrast
  with their personnel experience. However, AUBG students arrive at the University
  with a built-in comparative perspective. They are Bulgarians, Albanians,
  Serbians, and Kazhaks (to name just a few) who see America primarily as
  nation state, one profoundly different in culture and stature from their
  own. Our job is to show them not the borderlands or the interesting exceptions
  to the mainstream but the texture of the mainstream itself. This task unavoidably
  involves discussions of the unfashionable idea of American exceptionalism
  since it is plain to them that America is quite different from their homelands
  and they want to know why. For example I recently taught a class on Colonial
  America and found my students fascinated by the connection between protestantism,
  the Great Awakening and the creation of secular ideals of political liberty.
  This was something outside their experience as they had grown up in officially
  atheist, but de facto Orthodox Christian societies, in which the church
  has always been subservient to the state and where conformity and ritual,
  not self-examination and constant questioning (I refer here to the Puritan
  context) are highly valued. Another issue of constant interest to our students
  is the secret of American success. Why is America a rich and powerful nation
  while their country's mired in inefficiency and poverty. As I write this
  response the leva is trading at 1,120 to the dollar yesterday it was at
  950, tomorrow no one knows. Part of the mission of American Studies here
  will be to teach our students what parts of American business success are
  universal, what parts a product of our culture and particular circumstances,
  and what parts were purchased at too high a price.
  Living and teaching in Bulgaria has demonstrated to all of us on the
  American Studies committee the need to bring to our academic lives a strong
  dose of reality. Some things do matter more than others, some experiences
  and some groups, although worthy of study and respect, are less important
  or less significant than others. We believe that a return to a more traditional
  structure will allow American Studies, both at home and here in the far
  abroad, to present a clearer and better balanced picture of what it means
  to be American.
  My colleagues on the American Studies committee and I have been very
  pleased with the quantity and quality of the responses to our essay on
  methodology. We want to thank every one who has contributed thus far and
  are particularly gratified by the support shown for our program.
  Several respondents asked for more information about the program and
  the way it related to other majors here at AUBG. As an answer I have appended
  below a portion of the American Studies proposal which outlines the structure
  of the program and lists the various courses from our existing catalogue
  which will count toward American Studies credit. At present only two themes,
  Civil War and Religion, have been proposed for the introductory course
  and final seminar; however, I am planning to propose courses organized
  around the themes of Post-War America and American Business.
  Program Structure:
The American Studies major will consist of 36 credit hours divided into
  three components, an introductory course, two subject areas, and a capstone
  seminar.
  1) Introduction to American Studies, 3 credits, Team taught required
  of all majors and open to the general student body.
  2) American Studies courses are divided into two subject areas, American
  History and Society and American Literature and Communication students
  must take six courses in one area and four courses from the other. Of the
  total of ten courses five must be at the upper division level.
  3) Capstone Seminar in American Studies, 3 credits, to be taken by all
  majors in their Senior year. Taught on a rotating basis by members of the
  American Studies faculty.
  Subject Area Number One
  American History and Society
  Students may select from the following list of courses. If six courses
  are to be taken in this area two must be HTY 111 and 112 which should be
  taken in the first or second year of enrolment. Content of courses designated
  by an * vary: American Studies credit will only be given when at least
  50% of course content relates to American subjects.
  HISTORY
  HTY 111: U.S. History I HTY 112: U.S. History II HTY 215: American Civil
  War HTY 313: Colonial America HTY 317: America in the Twentieth Century
  HTY 405: American Diplomatic History HTY 413: American Indian History HTY
  419: The Roosevelt Era HTY 497: Special Topics*
  POLITICAL SCIENCE
  POS 101: Introduction to Politics POS 383: Topics in Comparative Politics*
  POS 381: Topics in Political Thought* POS 392: Topics in International
  Relations* POS 497: Special Topics*
  ECONOMICS
  ECO 341: Economic History* ECO 497: Special Topics*
  BUSINESS
  BUS 210: Business Law BUS 303: Marketing BUS 306: Personnel Management
  and Industrial Relations BUS 321: Managing in a Market Economy BUS 422:
  Advertizing
  Subject Area Number Two
  American Literature and Communication
  Students may select from the following list of courses. If six classes
  are taken in this area two must be ENG 241 and 242 which should be taken
  in the first or second year of enrolment. Content of courses designated
  by an * vary: American Studies credit will only be given when at least
  50% of course content relates to American subjects.
  ENGLISH
  ENG 226b: Introduction to Literature* ENG 241: Survey of American Literature
  I ENG 242: Survey of American Literature II ENG 450: Literary History Studies*
  ENG 470: Genre and Topical Studies* ENG 480: Major Authors*
  JOURNALISM AND MASS COMMUNICATION
  JMC 201: Introduction to Mass Communication - American Popular Culture
  JMC 303: Persuasion JMC 305: History of Mass Communication JMC 307a: Cultural
  Reporting* JMC 307b: Rhetorical Criticism JMC 497: Special Topics*
  FINE ARTS
  FAR 151: Introduction to Theater* FAR 307: History of Jazz FAR 497:
  Special Topics*
  PHILOSOPHY
  PHI 304: Political Philosophy* PHI 305: Philosophy of Religion* PHI
  310: Philosophy of Science* PHI 497: Special Topics*
   
  Vernon Pederson
American University of Bulgaria
Email: VERN@nws.aubg.bg






Communities
| Curriculum
| Technology
& Learning | Reference
& Research
Crossroads home
page | About
Crossroads | What's
New | Visitors'
Book
This section last updated September 1997. Please
send comments to Crossroads
Webstaff.


