




Interesting Internet Sites


Discovering Ideas



English Composition
Fall 2002
Palomar College




Interesting Internet Sites
There are many lists of good Internet sites available to you. The Palomar
Library homepage has a subject index with links on many different topics. This list just
contains links that I have found interesting or useful on various topics. It does not
include search engines but does include a few lists of other links. As you will soon
discover, they are in no particular order. If you have a problem with any of these links
or have any suggestions for additions to the list, please send me e-mail and let me know. I try to update this list
occasionally--not as often as I should, but as often as the demands of other work allow.
   For subjects related to learning and education, see the separate list of Learning Sites.
Contents

Subject Listings or General Guides 
Archives of Complete Books and
    Other Works 
Books and Literature 
Current Affairs 
Fine Arts 
Government, Economics, and Statistics

History 
Internet and Cyberculture 
Museums 

Subject Listings or General
Guides

The Argus Clearinghouse: A guide to Internet
    guides. Easy to use, with ratings of subject-specific sites that tell you when they were
    last reviewed. 
The WWW Virtual Library: A
    massive subject listing with high-quality sites on most subjects. Excellent research tool.
  
Yahoo!: A popular subject listing, with a search
    engine. Not as scholarly, but with good sites on practical issues and popular culture. 
Magellan Internet Guide: The subject listings
    here give you brief reviews of each site that can help you to find what's worth looking at
    a little more quickly. 
The Cybertimes
    Navigator: Originally developed for reporters at the New York Times, an
    excellent guide to Internet sources on current issues. 
Swiss Web Knife: This
    site from Maricopa Community College District in Arizona gives you convenient pull-down
    menus listing specialized search tools in different fields. A quick way to find a lot of
    search tools. 

Archives of Complete Books and
Other Works

The On-Line Books Page: A
    searchable index of thousands of books available in their entirely, free, on the Internet.
Project Bartleby Archive:
    Housed at Columbia University, this archive contains the complete texts of 38 classic
    books.
Project Gutenberg: The oldest and one
    of the largest archives of electronic texts of print material.

Books and Literature 

Literary Resources on the Net:
    An excellent subject guide to material relating to literature and criticism, compiled and
    maintained by Jack Lynch at Rutgers University.
Malaspina Great Books Home Page:
    From Malaspina University in British Columbia, Canada, this site presents a wealth of
    information about The Great Books of the Western World and a variety of other
    great books. The site can be a little confusing at first, but if you really want to
    explore an author or a particular work it's a great place to start.
The Academy of American Poets: Complete with
    recorded readings of dozens of poets. Often excellent specialized displays.
The Atlantic
    Monthly Poetry Pages: Classic and contemporary poetry from The Atlantic Monthly,
    with some excellent article and other sites.
Mr. William Shakespeare and the
    Internet: Probably the best site for Shakespeare research on-line, the work of
    Palomar's Terry Gray. 

Current Affairs

The Online Newshour: The transcript
    and archive of the best news program on television. Whether you watch The Newshour
    with Jim Lehrer (7:00 p.m. each weeknight on PBS), you should take a look at this
    site. The topics are current but important and the treatment goes well beyond the moronic
    level of most television news.
The New York Times on the Web: The daily
    New York Times is available on the Internet. It includes national and
    international news as well as a Technology section news and columns on computers and the
    Internet, and the Book Review. The New York Times remains one of the most
    authoritative sources on current national and international events. Their on-line version
    is basically the print version, except for the Cybertimes, which is designed for the
    Internet.
The Chicago Tribune: This is not the print
    newspaper; it is really a separate edition for the Internet. Lots of graphics; I find it a
    little harder to find things, but it's a work in progress.
Los Angeles Times: Fairly easy to access. The
    best newspaper on the West Coast for national and international news.
CNN Interactive: A good source for current
    national and international news.
MSNBC: Also very current.

Fine Arts

World Wide Arts Resources: Very comprehensive guide to
    museums, arts Web sites, and arts-related materials.
Art History Resources on the Web:
    Organized by time period, an excellent collection of links.
Art History Research Centre:
    A Canadian site, providing a variety of links and means to search for information in art
    history.
Classical Net: Large number of links and much
    searchable data on classical music.
Jazz Central Station:
      The education resources concerning the history and criticism of jazz are
    impressive.

Government, Economics, and Statistics

Government Ideas Sharing Project:
    Developed at the University of Oregon with support from a government grant, this is a good
    place to start in looking for statistical information. Clear guide to other government
    resources.
The CIA World Factbook:
    For recent data about all of the countries of the world, this is an excellent source.
The White House:  A lot of
    it's public relations, but there's also much history and some useful links.
The Library of Congress: One of the best Web sites in
    terms of breadth of information available.  Gives access to Thomas legislative
    information service if you want to find out about bills in Congress.
Federal Reserve Board: The Fed monitors the
    economy, and makes much of the information it uses to do so available on this page.
California Home Page: This is the home page for
    California's state government.  Links to a lot of information about the state, many
    government agencies.
The Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco: Economic
    information, with an emphasis on the West Coast.

History

The History Net: From the National
    Historical Society, an interesting and readable archive of lots of historical material.
Exploring Ancient World Cultures: A
    beautiful and very large collection of both links and text. If you are interested in
    getting background or finding detailed essays on specific issues in ancient history, this
    is an outstanding resource.
The Learning Page of the Library of
    Congress: Excellent resources on American history, with some wonderful photographs. 
American Studies Web: Contains
    both current affairs and history sources.
Core Documents of U.S.
    Democracy: The Superintendent of Documents of the United States has made official
    documents, from the Declaration of Independence to this year's budget, available,
    complete text, no charge. There are no longer any excuses for guessing what the 20th
    Amendment said.

Internet and Cyberculture

Resource Center for Cyberculture Studies: What
    is "cyberculture"? Who engages in it? A range of material is available here on
    the new culture growing up around the Internet and its applications. The annotated
    bibliography and featured links are a good way to get into this subject.

Museums

The Franklin Institute Museum
    Hotlist: Many museums, with an emphasis on science and natural history.
The Louvre
The Web Museum, Paris
The Metropolitan Museum of Art
The Museum of Modern Art
The Getty Museum





On-line Discovering
      Ideas Table of Contents
On-line Syllabus 
On-Campus
    Discovering Ideas Table of Contents 
On-Campus Syllabus 





Discovering Ideas
Palomar College
jtagg@palomar.edu 
This page was last edited: 08/19/02 


