








WKU Anth 335 Old World Prehistory syllabus





ANTH 335 Old World Prehistory
Dr. Darlene Applegate
Fall 2001
Course Syllabus


NOTE:  The printed and amended course syllabus that is distributed
in class is the ultimate authority for this class and supersedes information
posted in this on-line syllabus.


Instructor
Dr. Darlene Applegate
darlene.applegate@wku.edu
Office (FAC 280) 745-5094
Lab (Rock House) 745-6511
Office Hours:  MWF 10:00-11:00, F 12:05-1:05  and by appointment
 
 
Course Objectives
Old World Prehistory  surveys archaeological evidence of prehistoric
cultural developments in eight culture areas: Near East, Aegean and Mediterranean,
Lower Nile, tropical Africa, temperate Europe, Indian subcontinent, southeast
Asia, and China.  Although the record of material culture in the Old
World extends back two million years, particular emphasis is placed on
Neolithic, Copper Age, Bronze Age, and Iron Age periods.  It was during
these times that significant cultural changes - domestication, sedentism,
complex society - occurred.
We will focus on four things for each culture area:  environmental
characteristics, chronological units employed by archaeologists, diagnostic
features of the culture complex, and examples of early civilizations. 
When possible, we will examine explanations for major cultural changes
in each culture area.
Upon successful completion of this course, students will


learn the temporal frameworks used in the study of Old World prehistory.

understand the environmental milieu of several culture areas and recognize
the relationship between landscapes and cultural adaptations in prehistory.

become familiar with cultural components that distinguish each culture
area.

learn about the origins of and explanations for sedentism, food production,
and complex society in the Old World.

understand the cultural contributions made by prehistoric peoples of the
Old World.

prepare a detailed research paper about a specific topic of Old World prehistory.

consider the future of Old World archaeology.

This course fulfills General Education Categorical Requirement F.
 
Course Materials
The required text is People of the Earth by Brian Fagan (9th or 10th
edition).
Additional course materials and assignments are accessible on the course
web site at
http://www.wku.edu/~appleda/oldworld/front.html
Videos related to course content are shown periodically throughout the
semester.
 
 
General Expectations
The educational endeavor is a two-way street.  To insure a productive
and stimulating learning environment, students and instructors must meet
certain expectations.
It is my expectation that students will attend class regularly, prepare
for each class, exactly follow directions for completing assignments, complete
assignments on time, participate meaningfully and respectfully in class,
ask questions, monitor their performance, and seek assistance before matters
get out of hand.
Students are expected to make themselves aware of the provisions set
forth in this syllabus. Students are expected to bring the syllabus to
every class meeting and to make any adjustments to the syllabus announced
during class.  Students are strongly encouraged to review the information
in the syllabus on a regular basis.
Students should expect from me organized presentations, current information
on the subject, thoughtful evaluation of assignments, timely return of
graded assignments, access during office hours, and guidance in completing
course requirements.
Please come see me if you have any concerns during the semester.
 
 
Attendance Policy
The University attendance policy states that "registration in a course
obligates the student to be regular and punctual in class
attendance" (WKU Catalog 1999-2001:29; emphasis added).
Punctual arrival to class is expected.  Students who arrive to
class late are expected to find out what they missed.
Class attendance is tracked with sign-in sheets.  Students are
responsible for making sure they sign the attendance sheet each day. 
Students who forget to sign the sheet will be recorded as absent.
In order for an absence to be excused, all of the following requirements
must be met.


The excuse must be a legitimate reason for missing class.  Legitimate
excuses include serious illness, death in the family, University-sanctioned
activities, out-of-town job interview, jury duty, and religious holidays. 
Non-legitimate reasons for missing class include but are not limited to
chauffeuring friends, airplane reservations, family celebrations, meetings
with other professors or advisors, work, and unsanctioned University activities.

Written documentation must be given to the instructor and will be kept
on file.

Written documentation must be submitted at the next class meeting after
the absence.

If you are absent from class, it is your sole responsibility to find out
in a timely manner what you missed.  You are responsible for learning
the material you missed.  It is not possible to make up some missed
class work like videos.
Though your grade will not be lowered for unexcused absences, they will
likely contribute to poor academic performance in this course.  In
addition, excessive unexcused absences make students ineligible for earning
extra credit, as explained elsewhere in the syllabus.
Full attendance on exam days is expected.  Students who know they
will be absent on an exam date for a legitimate reason (University-sanctioned
activity, out-of-town job interview, jury duty, religious holiday) must
provide written documentation and make arrangements including a written
request at least three days before the scheduled test to take the exam
early.  Early exams will be scheduled at the instructor's convenience.
Make-up exams are typically a different format from the regular exams. 
All make-up exams will be given on Tuesday, December 11 between 10:30-12:30. 
Make ups for missed exams are given only if all of the following requirements
are met.


The instructor is notified by the student (not someone else) at least 24
hours prior to the exam time.

The absence occurs for a legitimate and unplanned reason, such as serious
illness, death in the family, or auto accident.

The absence is documented in writing.

Students who cease attending class are expected to complete withdrawal
forms in the Office of the Registrar.  If you don't attend class,
don't complete all the course requirements, and don't withdraw by the scheduled
date, you will fail the class.
 
 
Assignments
Following is a list of assignments for the course.  Each is described
in more detail elsewhere in the syllabus and on the course web site. 
Students should keep track of their grades on the assignments and track
their progress toward their target grades.
   Assignment        
Due Date        Points          
Grade
Midterm Exam 1       Sep 21      
150 points        ............
Midterm Exam 2       Oct 19       
150 points        ............
Midterm Exam 3       Nov 16      
150 points        ............
Research Paper      Dec 7         
100 points        ............
Final Exam               
Dec 11       150 points       
............
                                  
TOTAL         700 points
Though it is unlikely, the instructor reserves the right to add or eliminate
assignments during the course of the semester.  If this is necessary,
students will be given prior warning during class.
 
 
Grading Procedures
Numerical grades are given for each assignment.  If curving is
necessary, it will be done on individual assignments.  Curving usually
involves adding points to the numerical grade. Letter grades are not given
for individual assignments.
The final course grade is calculated by dividing the points earned (including
any extra credit points) by the total points possible (excluding extra
credit).  This percentage is then translated into a letter grade based
on a 10% scale (A=90-100%, B=80-89%, etc).  Final course grades will
not be curved.  In some cases, students with borderline percentages
(e.g., 59%, 69%, 79%, 89%) are given the higher grade based on class attendance,
class participation, improvement, and/or attitude.
 
 
Tests and Testing Policies
Four exams (three midterms and a final) are scheduled over the semester. 
Exams cover material presented in lecture, readings, and movies. 
While midterm exams are not comprehensive per say, it is assumed that students
will build and draw upon a foundation of material from previous tests.
Each in-class test is worth 150 points and consists of two parts. 
One part is an in-class subjective test composed of map, identification,
and short-answer questions.  The other part is a take-home essay(s)
that will be distributed about one week prior to the in-class test date
and will be due at the beginning of class time on the in-class test date. 
Late take-home essays will not be accepted.  Review material is posted
on the course web page about one week prior to each exam.
Students are expected to arrive on time for tests.  To insure that
you arrive on time, I suggest you set two alarm clocks (one battery operated),
have a friend call you, and leave home early enough to beat traffic and
find a parking place.  In the case that a student is excessively late
in arriving to take a test, the instructor reserves the right to deny that
student the opportunity to take the test with no possibility of a make-up
exam.  If a student arrives late to an exam and other students have
already completed and turned in their tests, then the tardy student will
not be permitted to take the exam and will not be given a make-up exam.
To insure security during tests, students will be instructed to place
all their materials in a closed book bag under their desks.  Students
wearing ball caps must remove them or turn them backwards.  Once a
student starts an exam, he/she cannot leave the testing room for any reason
until the exam is turned in.  Students cannot get into their book
bags during the test, unless permission is granted by the instructor.
Students with disabilities who require accommodations (academic adjustments
and/or auxiliary aids or services) for this course must contact the Office
for Student Disability Services, Room 445, Potter Hall.  The OFSDS
telephone number is 745-5004 V/TDD.  Please do not request accommodations
directly from me without a letter of accommodation from the Office for
Student Disability Services.  Arrangements must be made at least three
days in advance of each exam.
Students who know they will be absent on an exam date for a legitimate
reason (University-sanctioned activity, out-of-town job interview, jury
duty, religious holiday) must make arrangements at least three days before
the scheduled test to take the exam early.  Written documentation
of the reason for missing the test and a written request for an early exam
must be submitted.  Early exams will be scheduled at the instructor's
convenience.
 Make-up exams are typically a different format from the regular
exams.  All make-up exams will be given on Tuesday, December 11 between10:30-12:30. 
Make ups for missed exams are given only if all of the following requirements
are met.


The instructor is notified by the student (not someone else) at least 24
hours prior to the exam time.

The absence occurs for a legitimate and unplanned reason, such as serious
illness, death in the family, or auto accident.

The absence is documented in writing.

Exams are typically handed back during the first class session following
the test.  Students who are absent when exams are returned and who
want to pick up their exams must do so during the instructor's office hours.
 
 
Videos
Several videos related to course material are scheduled over the semester. 
Full attendance on video days is expected, and missed videos cannot be
made up.  Students are expected to record notes during and after each
video.  The entire class will discuss the video content and relate
it to lecture material and readings.  Students are responsible for
video information on the exams.
 
 
Web Notes
Since there is not enough lecture time to cover all important topics
related to the prehistory of each culture area, additional
notes are posted on the course web site.  This information relates
to environmental background, culture history, and early civilizations in
each culture area.  Students are responsible for all web notes as
they are essential supplements to the lectures and readings.
 
 
Research Paper 
Each student will complete a research paper on an Old World prehistory
topic of his/her choice.  The research must be based on scholarly
sources related to a specific topic.  Papers will be 14-16 pages in
length with AAA citations.  Suggested topics
and details for
completing the research paper are posted on the course web site.
 
 
Due Dates 
Two of the skills I expect that students will acquire in college are
time management and responsibility. Therefore, I expect that all assignments
will be turned in at the beginning of class on the days they are due. Be
warned that I will not accept or grade assignments that are submitted after
the due dates. If you can't be in class on a day when an assignment is
due, you need to submit the assignment early or have someone turn it in
for you on time. Students who need to submit assignments early and can't
find me on campus may slide the assignments under my office door.
Under unusual circumstances, students may petition for an extension
of the due date for an assignment. Extensions will be considered only if
all of the following requirements are met.


A written request for an extension, explaining a legitimate reason why
extra time is needed, must be submitted to the instructor. (Computer failure,
work schedules, extracurricular activities, and an overload of work in
other classes are examples of non-legitimate reasons for requesting an
extension.)

The student must meet with the instructor at least three days before the
due date to submit and discuss the written request. If the extension is
granted, a new date will be established.

The student must complete the assignment by the new due date.

 
Academic Dishonesty
"The maintenance of academic integrity is of fundamental importance
to the University.  Thus it should be clearly understood that acts
of plagiarism or any other form of cheating will not be tolerated and that
anyone committing such acts risks punishment of a serious nature" (WKU
Catalog 1999-2001:28).
Academic dishonesty, including cheating and plagiarism, will be dealt
with in accordance with University policy.  "Students who commit any
act of academic dishonesty may receive from the instructor a failing grade
in that portion of the coursework in which the act is detected or a failing
grade in the course without possibility of withdrawal" (WKU Catalog 1999-2001:28). 
Sanctions may also be brought against the perpetrator.  Students are
responsible for understanding what constitutes cheating and plagiarism;
the University descriptions are provided below.
"No student shall receive or give assistance not authorized by the instructor
in taking an examination or in the preparation of an essay, laboratory
report, problem assignment or other project which is submitted for purposes
of grade determination" (WKU Catalog 1999-2001:28).
"To represent written work taken from another source [book, journal,
web site, lecture, lab, or other source whether it is prepared by the instructor,
a guest speaker, or a classmate] as one's own is plagiarism.  Plagiarism
is a serious offense. The academic work of a student must be his/her own. 
One must give any author credit for source material borrowed from him/her. 
To lift content directly from a source without giving credit is a flagrant
act.  To present a borrowed passage without reference to the source
after having changed a few words is also plagiarism" (WKU Catalog 1999-2001:28).
Students must take special care to exactly quote and/or accurately paraphrase
each source that is cited in any written assignment, including research
papers, outlines, annotated bibliographies, and take-home tests.
 
 
Extra Credit
In certain circumstances, students are permitted to earn extra credit
points in order to achieve at their desired level.  Extra credit is
not intended as a means of recouping lost points due to poor class attendance
and/or failure to complete all assignments.  Extra credit work is
done in the Anthropology Lab at the instructor's convenience.  A student
will be afforded this opportunity only if he/she fulfills all of the following
requirements.


The student has no more than three unexcused absences over the course of
the semester.

The student completes all assignments.

The student makes a written request to do extra credit.  I want to
know four things:  what your target grade is, what your current grade
is, why you are not achieving at your desired level, and what you plan
to do (other than extra credit) to improve your performance.  Also
include your name, the date, and the course number.

The student submits the written request and speaks with the instructor
during office hours.

 
Note-taking Policies
An accurate and complete set of lecture notes is important for performing
well in this class. Many topics covered in class are not in the text book,
so lecture is the only source for information on such topics.  Suggestions
for taking good notes include pre-reading, pre-class preparation, listening
for clue words, taping lectures, comparing notes with other students and/or
the text book, rewriting and reorganizing notes, and asking the instructor
for clarification in class or during office hours.  See the instructor
for more specific note-taking strategies.
Tape recording of lectures for the purpose of improving note-taking
is permitted only when a written request is made to the instructor and
when prior consent is given by the instructor.
The instructor considers lecture material (like any other course material)
to be intellectual property.  Students who enroll in this class are
entitled to use this material for their personal education.  Students
are not to sell lecture notes, web notes and other class materials to other
students or to note-taking services, online or otherwise; such action constitutes
copyright infringement and will be prosecuted.
 
 
Course Schedule
The course is divided into four units.  There will be a test on
each unit.  Every attempt will be made to adhere to the following
schedule, but the instructor reserves the right to make adjustments as
necessary.  Changes to the course schedule will be announced in class.
 
UNIT 1:  INTRODUCTION , NEAR EAST, MEDITERRANEAN AND AEGEAN
 
1   Aug 20-24   Introduction             
Chapters 1, 8, 14
2   Aug 27-31   Near East                
Chapters 9, 15, pp. 473-480
     Aug 27        
Drop/Add Ends
3   Sep 3          
Holiday
     Sep 5-7       
Near East               
Chapters 9, 15, pp. 473-480
4   Sep 10 -14  Med/Aegean           
Chapters 10, pp. 480-492
5   Sep 17-19  Med/Aegean            
Chapters 10, pp. 480-492
      Sep 21       
Midterm Exam
 
 
UNIT 2:  LOWER NILE, TROPICAL AFRICA
6   Sep 24-28     Lower Nile            
Chapters 11, 16
 
7   Oct 1-3          
Lower Nile            
Chapters 11, 16
     Oct 5              
Holiday
8   Oct 8-12        Tropical
Africa        Chapters 11, 16
9   Oct 15-17      Tropical Africa       
Chapters 11, 16
      Oct 19           
Midterm Exam
      Oct 15           
Last Day to Withdraw
 
 
UNIT 3:  TEMPERATE EUROPE, INDIAN SUBCONTINENT
10   Oct 22-26        Temperate
Europe          Chapters 10,
20
11   Oct 29-Nov 2  Temperate Europe         
Chapters 10, 20
12   Nov 5-9           
Indian Subcontinent       pp. 436-449
13   Nov 12-14        Indian
Subcontinent      pp. 436-449
        Nov 16             
Midterm Exam
 
UNIT 4:  SOUTHEAST ASIA, CHINA, CONCLUSIONS
14   Nov 19            
Southeast Asia              
Chapter 12, pp. 449-458
        Nov 21-23      
Holiday
15   Nov 26 -30      Southeast Asia              
Chapter 12, pp. 449-458
                                 
China                              
Chapters 12, 18
16   Dec 3-7           
China                              
Chapters 12, 18
                                 
Conclusions
17   Dec 11            
Final Exam 10:30-12:30
                                 
Make-up Exams 10:30-12:30
 
 
Syllabus Modifications
The instructor reserves the right to modify anything in the syllabus,
with prior warning via an in-class announcement, during the course of the
semester.  Students are responsible for being apprised of any such
modifications and for recording such modifications on their syllabi.
 
 


Return to Old
World Prehistory Home Page


Visit the Western Kentucky University Home Page, Western
Online
Page composed by Darlene Applegate, darlene.applegate@wku.edu
Last updated on August 21, 2001
All contents copyright (c), 2001. Western Kentucky University.


