
DIGITAL LIBRARIES (L576)


L576 (Fall 2000): Digital
Libraries Syllabus



Course description



Digital libraries (DL) are large collections of multimedia information that
are usually created with the purpose of supporting learning or knowledge acquisition.
The World Wide Web (WWW)
is a powerful platform for providing access to multimedia data to a 
large group of users. Hence, it is no surprise that the WWW is often the platform of choice for 
the deployment of DLs.  The WWW,
however, is merely a platform -- it is the responsibility of the DL developer to
collect appropriate content, design the information architecture, and develop suitable user-interaction features so that
the DL can be used effectively.



The overall objective of this course is to expose the student to major
issues, concepts, and trends surrounding DLs, with special emphasis on
design and implementation of key DL functions.    The course will begin with a
survey of prominent DL projects and underlying technologies.   Then,
students will concentrate, for several weeks, on developing a prototype DL
(small-scale) by using the WWW and related tools.  As part of the DL
development students will learn system planning, information organization,
user interface principles, and usability evaluation.   In the last few
weeks of the course, the focus will shift to broader and more advanced issues 
dealing with extensible markup languages (XML), security, site management and evaluation.



 
Objectives


At the end of the course, students will be able to:




 Identify and manipulate different multimedia formats appropriate for DL content 

 Set up WWW-based server and related tools

 Plan and gather requirements, organize information, and design sound
information architecture 
 Apply basic knowledge of data types, markup, programming and user
interface principles to create a prototype DL

 Select and apply procedures for usability evaluation

 Describe the recent advances for extending DL functions and securing DL content



 
Requirements for the class:


5% -		Project Part 1: DL Project
requirements-specification

25% -	Project Part 2: DL architecture evaluation 

50%	-	Project Part 3: Completed DL project prototype

20%	-	In-class Exam


Detailed project guidelines will be handed out well before the project work
begins.  Students are highly recommended to work in groups.  Each project
group will select an area of concentration and will set up and manage
their own server environment until the end of the semester.

The exam will deal with materials covered in the lectures.  It will consist of
mainly short fact-based questions and a few open-ended questions requiring critical
assessment of relevant issues.   A review session will be conducted a week before the exam.




 
Grading scale 

All grades will be assigned according to the SLIS Grading Policy for
Master's and Specialist Level Students. This policy was defined by student
and faculty members of SLIS's Curriculum Steering Committee and was
adopted by the Faculty of the School of Library and Information Science,
Indiana University, on November 11, 1996, as an aid in evaluation of
student performance: 



Grade

Numerical
Grade


Description


A

4.0

Outstanding achievement. Student
performance demonstrates full command of the course materials and evinces
a high level of originality and/or creativity that far surpasses course
expectations.


A-

3.7

Excellent achievement. Student
performance demonstrates thorough knowledge of the course materials and
exceeds course expectations by completing all requirements in a superior
manner.


B+

3.3

Very good work. Student
performance demonstrates above-average comprehension of the course
materials and exceeds course expectations on all tasks as defined in the
course syllabus.


B

3.0

Good work. Student performance
meets designated course expectations, demonstrates understanding of the
course materials and performs at an acceptable level.


B-

2.7

Marginal work. Student
performance demonstrates incomplete understanding of course materials.



C+ 
C

2.3 
2.0

Unsatisfactory work. Student
performance demonstrates incomplete and inadequate understanding of course
materials.


C- 
D+ 
D 
D-

1.7 
1.3 
1.0 
0.7

Unacceptable work. Coursework
performed at this level will not count toward a graduate degree. For the
course to count toward the degree, the student must repeat the course with
a passing grade.


F

0.0

Failing. Student may continue in
program only with permission of the Dean.




 
Books

Required book

Internet & World Wide Web: How to program by Deitel, Deitel & Nieto (henceforth DDN).  Prentice Hall, 2000. 



Highly recommended book
HTML 4 for the World Wide Web by Elizabeth Castro.  Peachpit,
1998.


Useful books

Practical digital libraries by Michael Lesk.  Morgan-Kaufmann,
1997.

Information architecture for the World Wide Web by Louis Rosenfeld and Peter Morville. O'Reilly, 1998.

How to setup and maintain a web site by Lincoln D. Stein.
Addison-Wesley,
1997.

PERL & CGI for the World by Elizabeth Castro.  Peachpit, 1999.



 
Contact information


Office hours: 	Thursday 10:00 AM - 12:00 PM (Rm. 025, SLIS). Appointments
for other time slots welcome.

Phone: 	(812) 856-4182
Fax:	(812) 855-6166

E-mail: 	jm@indiana.edu

HTTP server:	xtasy.slis.indiana.edu 
FTP server: 	shakti.slis.indiana.edu


 
 Course outline & calendar



Week 1 -- August 30


Digital libraries: An overview

Ongoing projects and major issues

Course requirements

Readings: 

 
Difference between automated and conventional libraries
 A brief introduction to copyright law


Week 2 -- September 6

Technologies of digital libraries

Server environment and hosting options

Initial setup of Apache (project server environment)

Readings: 

Chapter 24 (DDN)
Server installation guide by SLIS UNIX support staff


Students should begin to form project groups.
The following week each group sets up a project server
environment in a UNIX machine maintained at SLIS.

Week 3 -- September 13

Server setup by each group

Introduction to multimedia data formats 

Image capture & manipulation

Readings: Chapter 5 (DDN) 

Project work: Requirements specification (Project Part 1) due on week 6; establish basic objectives,
user needs, and time-line.


Week 4 -- September 20

Multimedia continued: Audio and video 

Requirements specification and planning


Readings: Chapter 21 (DDN)

Project work: Preliminary work begins; students login to their
project servers and begin to develop initial architecture for their site.


Week 5 -- September 27

Information architecture 

Stylesheets

Introduction to Javascript: Dynamic HTML (Position, redirect, etc.)

Project work: Add basic style elements and Javascript to project content.

Readings: Chapters 14 and 15 (DDN)


Week 6 -- October 4

User interface principles for web information systems: Form design

CGI and Perl

Javascript techniques for UI enhancement I (Event handling and transitions)

Readings: Chapters 11, 16 and 17 (DDN)

Project work:  Add form for collecting usability and use data

Requirements-specification report due


Week 7 -- October 11

Searching and Indexing I: Unstructured data 

SWISH indexing and searching implementation


Project work: Incorporate searching function in project site



Week 8 -- October 18

Javascript techniques for UI enhancement II (Frames, Windows, Popups, and Feedback)


Project work: Improve UI by incorporating more Javascript 

Readings: Chapters 15, 16, and 26 (DDN)



Week 9 -- October 25

Searching and Indexing II: Structured data

Introduction to relational database design and structured query language (SQL)

Oracle DB implementation

Readings: Chapter 25 (DDN)

Project work: Create a relational db using Oracle



Week 10 -- November 1

Searching and Indexing III: Structured data contd.

Introduction to middleware tools: ColdFusion and Java

Exam review

Project: Create web front-end to support searching of relational DB

Readings: Chapters 23 and 25 (DDN)



Week 11 -- November 8

Review of usability testing procedures

In-class exam


Project work: Continue work on refining search front-ends.  Project architecture (major features and functions) 
review based on usability testing starts.  Usability report form handed out in class.  Completed report form (Project Part 2) due on week 13.



Week 12 -- November 15



Introduction to security

Firewalls, encryption, and secure transactions

User id and password based web content protection

Project work: Architecture usability testing continues.  Students begin to complete the usability report form.


Week 13 -- November 29


Advanced DL topics

Tracking transactions and tuning the server

Extensible markup language (XML)


Project work: Refine content and architecture based on usability evaluation.  Incorporate transaction
analysis in project site.



Readings: Chapter 28 (DDN)



Week 14 -- December 6

Project work presentation.  Project Part 3 due.




This page is being served by Javed M  |   Update? Please email me


