



Biology of Consciousness Syllabus







Navigation Section

















HONORS 4000-882
The Biology of Consciousness








© 1998






















Course HomePage




Student Projects




Syllabus


















Course Bookmarks




Dubin Bookmarks




Instructor Info









Syllabus and Readings
To see only the topics without the readings click here



A few assumptions and principles that I start with.

There is a real physical world. 

Science is an attempt to reproducibly characterize that world
			in predictive ways 

This results in useful constructions that are what we know about
			the "true" nature of things. 

The physical brain evolved in ways consistent with Darwinian principles
			of natural selection. 





What are we talking about when we use the term consciousness,
		and what can we know about it?

"What is consciousness?"
Summary of class discussion 
			
Mind and Brain, a dualism.
			Descartes, from Cogito Ergo Sum  - Brief Abstract
			Descartes, from Body as Machine  - Brief Abstract
			Descartes, Meditation #2  - at The Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy
Introduction and Section I (parts 1-6)  - at Mind and Body: Descartes to James 
Reading questions on the above for discussion.

Consciousness and the incorrigible nature of qualia.
			Nagel, What is it like to be a bat?  (handout) 
Reading questions on Nagel for discussion.
			Two papers by Dennett that argue against the existance of Qualia:
Instead of Qualia and Quining Qualia. 
			
Consciousness, reductionism and the brain.
			Searle, Minds, Brains and Science  - chapters 1 and 6.

Yes, there is a hard problem.
			Chalmers,The Puzzle of Conscious Experience. (handout) 
			
Can/Will we ever know?
			Dubin, Of Aspirin and Elephants.




What are some neural correlates of consciousness?

Bridging from the philosophical to the biological.
			Churchland, Can Neurobiology Teach us Anything about Consciousness?
Searle, How to study consciousness . . . (1998) Brain Research Interactive Online. (handout)

A bit of basic neuroscience.
			Basic Neuroscience principles at Explore the Brain and Spinal Cord. The sections on The Brain and The Neuron are required, others
			are optional. 
			
Using Neuroimaging to look at cognition and consciousness.
			Learn about Neuroimaging techniques at these sites:
Neuroimaging Primer
MRI and fMRI, some basics
Watching the Brain in Action. Be sure to watch the on-line movie.
PET (Positron Emmision Tomography) basics. Be sure to look at the
			on-line brochure.


other resources: More introductory information is available at:
				MRI Introduction for High School Students
What is fMRI? A basic explanation for patients.
				Neuroimaging links list.
				MRI resource links.
Links to MRI Journals with online materials.


fMRI of a visual-motor task. Use this to familiarize yourself with
			typical images.

Note the usual MRI convention that the LEFT side of the head is
				presented at the RIGHT side of the picture, as if one were facing
				the subject and looking upwards at the head. (this is not always
				the case, and images are usually labeled so you can tell.) Also
				note that there is activity in the visual cortex, at the back
				of the brain, as well as in the motor area of the cortex.


Task-related fMRI images and single images from a movie.

Note that the movie itself is not in a format that many browsers
				can handle. However, the single images and their explanations
				are of interest. Be sure you understand that the images are often
				viewed in different planes, such as saggital, coronal and axial.
				Be sure you understand the basis of the TASK-RELATED nature of
				these images.


Stimulus-related PET normal brain images and visualization of abnormalities in Alzheimer's, development and dyslexia (fMRI).

Research article: Cortical areas supporting category learning identified using functional
			MRI. P. J. Reber, et al. (1998) PNAS. 95:747-750. (handout)

Research article: Brain Regions Responsive to Novelty in the Absence of Awareness. G.S. Berns, et al. (1997) Science. 276:1272-1275. (handout)


NOTE ON IMAGES: The color pictures from the above two articles
				can be seen on-line here.

Other resource: Whole Brain Atlas


Blindsight.
			Online Demonstration and basic introduction.
Research article:Pattern of neuronal activity associated with conscious and unconscious
			processing of visual signals. A. Sahraie, et al. (1997) PNAS. 94:9406-9411. (handout)

Vision of 'What vs. How' and blindsight. Starts here and continues on the next web page.

Section on blindsight from a review article: Visual Perception and Visual Awareness after Brain Damage: A Tutorial
			Overview. (1995) In: Attention and Performance XV, edited by C. Umilita and M. Moscovitch, MIT Press. (handout)

Research article: Do imagined and executed actions share the same neural substrate? J. Decety (1996) Cognitive Brain Research. 3:87-93. (handout)

Illusions: tricks the brain plays.
			Start with the Online discussion and demonstration Tricks of the Eye at Serendib. Be sure to visit all the links at Serendib related
			to illusions, including: Seeing more than your eye does (four link levels), and lateral inhibition. 


Optional: While at Serendib you might want to play The Prisioners Dilemma in order to experience how one can operate in a cognitively ambiguous
				environment. 


Next, go to Illusion Works, which has examples of the major types of illusions, as well
			as discussions about them. Be sure to see: Introduction to Illusions, the Interactive Demonstrations Hall of Illusions, and Illusions in Art including the discussion. 

Then, you should check out the sites Fun Things in Vision and the Visual Illusions Gallery. While many of the illusions there are repeats of ones at the
			ones above, in some cases the display format is different and
			some not at the other sites are shown.


IMPORTANT TECHNICAL NOTE: The Browser you use needs up-to-date plugins for Java and Shockwave
				to see some of these demos properly (or at all). If it is your
				own machine and you know what to do, you can follow the onscreen
				suggestions for installation of the necessary items. Most of the
				browsers on campus should work, but some may not be properly updated.
				If you have trouble, look for a machine that is current, such
				as in a faculty lab you have access to.


Cognitive Illusions
Research article - Judgement under uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases. Tversky, A. & D. Kahneman (1974) Science. (handout)

Pathological Conditions.
			Annotated list of Agnosias, and Related Behavioral and Cognitive Disorders.
Abstracts of case descriptions from the journal Neurocase.
Handout, What Course Can Teach Us How to Understand a Fading of the Soul? by Lawrence Biemiller.

Handout, from Ch. 11, The Neurology of Thinking by D.F. Benson
The Binding Problem.
			This is treated in an on-line seminar run by the Association for the Scientific Study of Consciousness.
			Start by reading the target article, Temporal Binding, Binocular Rivalry and Consciousness. Then examine the commentary and discussion items that interest you.



		Can we show that consciousness matters?

What might be the evolutionary pressure for its selection?
			Polgar & Flanagan. Is Consciousness an Adaptation.
Barlow, The Biological Role of Consciousness. In: Mindwaves, Blakemore and Greenfield, eds. (handout) 
			
Does parapsychology tell us anything relevant?
			See the site Princeton Engineering Anomalies Research: Scientific Study of Consciousness-Related Physical Phenomena and then read the sections Background, The PEAR Laboratory, and
			Human/Machine Anomoly in their paper Consciousness and Anomalous Physical Phenemona.




Are animals conscious?

How Might We Know.
Colin Allen and Marc Bekoff, Species of Mind, chapter 8, Consciousness: Essential or dispensable? (handout)
			
			
Primate consciousness.
			NATURE video, Monkey in the Mirror (shown in class)




Is the brain (like) a computer? Can a computer have a mind?

Turing Machines. Replacement of the brain a part at a time, Turing
			Machines and Syntax vs. Semantics - The Chinese Room.
Is the brain (like) a computer?

Computational Approaches
			Research Paper (handout): Mathis and Mozer, On the Computational
			Utility of Consciousness.




 
Who/What is I?

Buddhism.
The Buddhist concept of mindfulness.

The Implications of psychoactive agents.
			Kramer, Chapter 9, Listening To Prozac.
			
Agent vs. locus.

Free will.






