




Women of Color Syllabus


Race, Class, Gender:
Women of Color in the U.S.
 
CSP 30--Spring 1996
 
Prof. Elmer Griffin, Psychology and Religious Studies: Weller 13a, x2799
Prof. Donna Maeda, Religious Studies:  Weller 4a, x2856
Prof. Monique Taylor, Sociology: Swan M314, x2871

Course Description:
This course examines gender, race, and class as categories of analysis
for understanding the experiences of individuals in U.S. society. In an
attempt to elucidate conceptions and ideas which shape cultural and sexual
identities, women of color will be our primary focus. By moving women of
color from their historically marginal position in the curriculum to the
center of our attention, we will begin to explore ways of transforming
knowledge about culture and society. Specific readings, discussion, and
writing will center on themes of identity, difference, and resistance in
the lives and experience of U.S. women of color.

Required Textbooks:
Gloria Anzaldua, Borderlands/La Frontera: The New Mestiza
Patricia Hill Collins, Black Feminist Thought: Knowledge, Consciousness,
and the Politics of Empowerment
Frederick Crews, The Random House Handbook
Angela Davis, An Autobiography
Jamaica Kincaid, The Autobiography of My Mother
Maxine Hong Kingston, The Woman Warrior: Memoirs of a Girlhood Among
Ghosts
photocopied reader

Course Requirements and Grades:
Students will be expected to actively participate in the course. Attendance
and preparation in both the Colloquium and Seminar portions of the course
are mandatory.

Grades will be based on the following:
3 Papers, 20% each 60%
Additional Assignments (including study questions, quizzes, etc.) 20%
Attendance and Participation 20%

Weekly Schedule and Reading Assignments:
Unit I: Identity (Prof.
Griffin)
The first section of this course will be concerned with the problem
of identity and knowledge, i.e., with the question of how you are affects
what you can know. Our goal is to understand the issues of Identity Politics
as they bear on gender and race. We will examine the deconstruction of
self-identity as a "phallogocentric white western capitalist ideal which
represses the connectedness of human beings." We will also explore the
neo-conservative implication of this deconstruction of self-identity as
it functions to disempower individuals and groups.
 

Week 1
1/17 Course Introductions--Policies and Practices
1/19 Angela Davis, An Autobiography, Part 1 (pp. 1-73)
Allison Weir, "Introduction" (photocopy)

Week 2
1/24 Angela Davis, An Autobiography, Parts 2-4 (pp. 77-279)
Video: Angela Davis lecture

1/26 Angela Davis, An Autobiography, Parts 5-6 (pp. 283-400)

Week 3
1/31 Jamaica Kincaid, The Autobiography of My Mother (pp. 1-83)

2/2 Jamaica Kincaid, The Autobiography of My Mother (pp. 84-160)

Week 4
2/7 Jamaica Kincaid, The Autobiography of My Mother (pp. 161-228)

2/9 Autobiography and Identity (First Writing Assignment
handed out)
"One Drop of Blood," The New Yorker (photocopy)

Week 5
2/14 Prof. Taylor: An Advanced Problem in Identity Politics
Allison Weir, "Conclusion" (photocopy)

2/16 Prof. Maeda: Identity and Difference
video: Public Hearing, Private Pain, Part 1

Paper #1 Due
 
Unit II: Difference(s)
(Prof. Maeda)
"What is involved in the project of rescinding borders is a critical
awareness of how borders have been (and continue to be) systematically
policed and for whose ideological benefit and material profit. The way
to rescind borders is of course to cross them, and in doing so, blur them,
confuse them, make them permeable, open for traffic from all directions,
and, as a result, realize that they have in fact been open all along, crossed
by illegal traffic of all kinds--in short, that differences of the kind
that do not settle down into binaries have already proliferated in our
own backyards."
--Vera Kutzinski
Week 6
2/21 Identities and Differences
video: Public Hearing, Private Pain, Part 2

2/23 Kimberle Crenshaw, "Whose Story, Anyway? Feminist and Antiracist
Appropriations of Anita Hill" (photocopy)

Week 7
2/28 Differences: Cultures and Locations
Maxine Hong Kingston, The Woman Warrior
3/1 Maxine Hong Kingston, The Woman Warrior (continued)

Week 8
3/6 Gloria Anzaldua, Chapter 1, "The Homeland, Aztlan/El otro Mexico";
Chapter 2, "Movimientos de rebeldia y las culturas que traicionan"

3/8 Gloria Anzaldua, Chapter 3, "Entering Into the Serpent"; Chapter
4, "La herencia de Coatlicue/The Coatlicue State"

Week 9
3/13 Differences, Identities, Spaces for Change
bell hooks, "Choosing the Margin as a Space of Radical Openness" (photocopy)
Leny Mendoza Strobel, "A Personal Story: Becoming a Split Filipina
Subject" (photocopy)
Chandra Mohanty, "Defining Genealogies: Feminist Reflections on Being
South Asian in North America" (photocopy)

3/15 Trinh T. Minh-ha, "Not You/Like You: Post-Colonial Women and the
Interlocking Questions of Identity and Difference" (photocopy)
Gloria Anzaldua, Chapter 7, "La conciencia de la mestiza: Towards a
New Consciousness"

Week 10
3/20 Spring Break

3/22 Spring Break

Week 11
3/27 Prof. Griffin: Postcoloniality and Difference
Trinh T. Minh-ha, "Not You/Like You: Post-Colonial Women and the Interlocking
Questions of Identity and Difference" (photocopy)

3/29 Prof. Taylor: Differences, Identities, and Kinds of Change
bell hooks, "Choosing the Margin as a Space of Radical Openness" (photocopy)

 Paper #2 Due
 
Unit III: Resistance
(Prof. Taylor)
If we don't like the world we're living in, change it. And if we can't
change it, we change ourselves. We can do something.
--Nikki Giovanni
Week 12
4/3 Knowledge
Patricia Hill Collins, Preface; Acknowledgements; Chapter 1, "The Politics
of Black Feminist Thought"; Chapter 2, "Defining Black Feminist Thought"

4/5 bell hooks, "Choosing the Margin as a Space of Radical Openness"
(photocopy)
Mitsuye Yamada, "Invisibility is an Unnatural Disaster" (photocopy)

Week 13
4/10 Consciousness
Patricia Hill Collins, Chapter 4, "Mammies, Matriarchs, and Other Controlling
Images"; Chapter 5, "The Power of Self-Definition"; Chapter 7, "Rethinking
Black Women's Activism"

4/12 Rayna Green, "The Pocahontas Perplex" (photocopy)
Gloria Anzaldua, Chapter 7, "La conciencia de la mestiza: Towards a
New Consciousness"

Week 14
4/17 The Politics of Empowerment
Prof. Griffin: Sexual Identity & Resistance
Patricia Hill Collins, Chapter 8, "The Sexual Politics of Black Womanhood"

4/19 Prof. Maeda: Difference & Resistance
Gloria Anzaldua, Chapter 5, "How to Tame a Wild Tongue"; Chapter 6,
"Tlilli, Tlapalli: The Path of the Red and Black Ink"

Week 15
4/24 The Politics of Empowerment (continued)
Patricia Hill Collins, Chapter 10, "Toward an Afrocentric Feminist
Epistemology"; Chapter 11, "Knowledge, Consciousness, and the Politics
of Empowerment"

4/26 Virginia Harris and Trinity Ordona, "Developing Unity Among Women
of Color: Crossing the Barriers of Internalized Racism and Cross-Racial
Hostility" (photocopy)
Paula Gunn Allen, "When Women Throw Down Bundles: Strong Women Make
Strong Nations" (photocopy)

Paper #3 Due during Finals Week (date to be announced)



Click here to see the Fall
1994 "Race, Class, Gender:  Women of Color in the U.S." Syllabus
 
 
 


