Physical Geology - Georgia Perimeter College


Physical Geology at Georgia Perimeter College

Dr. Pamela Gore

New World Seafloor Map from NOAA, Marine Geology and Geophysics Division
Click here to see complete map
Explanation of map
Link to images from NOAA
As the world turns - animated gif 
Global Relief - Select a view of the Earth to rotate globe
Topography of Georgia


 
Course Syllabus

 Fall 1998 Lecture Syllabus 

Teaching Objectives for Lecture
Teaching Objectives for Lab


Helpful Resources

Link to textbook's web site - Tarbuck and Lutgens, Earth. 
Pick a chapter, press "Begin" and link to several types of quiz questions.   I just discovered that for each chapter under "Further browsing", many of their chapters link to my course notes.

Laboratory Manual for Physical Geology - includes corrections and web links for each lab.
Earth Online:  An Internet Guide for Earth Science.  In particular, see the Internet Resources for Earth Science page. 
PLANET DIARY - CURRENT PHENOMENA
Illustrated Glossary of Geologic Terms
Geology Link from Worth Publishers
Geologic Time Chart
Geology lecture notes from other institutions:
	
Physical Geology at University  of Houston (John Butler)
Floyd College, GA
Geology at Duke University
University of Cincinatti
University of British Columbia

WH Freeman GeologyTextbooks
Textbook:  Understanding Earth, by Press and Siever
Search for images in the University of British Columbia Earth and Ocean Sciences Image Collection
University of Akron Geology Photo Archive
The Canadian Rockhound - a neat web magazine!


Submit your questions and comments to Dr. Gore at Georgia Geoscience Online

 Interactive Course Outline

Lecture Notes
Homework Assignments
Additional references
 
Introduction to Physical Geology



Introduction to the Internet
Important information for class
       

Topographic Maps  (for lab)


Stone Mountain Topo Lab

    

 
Faults
Earthquakes 


Worldwide Distribution of Earthquakes - Due _________

Learn how to locate earthquake epicenters on-line. - Due __________
Print out the Certificate of Completion with your name when finished.

Dacula, GA Earthquake Intensity Exercise
 and this map
Earthquake Information Page
Seismic Resources on the Web - Part 1
Seismic Resources on the Web - Part 2
Seeing California Move With Global Positioning Satellites

Interior of the Earth 

     

Earth's Interior from UNR
Earth's Interior notes from U. Texas, El Paso
New England Meteoritical Services

Plate tectonics


Please print out movie notes and see video
Planet Earth - The Living Machine.
Online Test 1

Map showing age of the ocean crust - NOAA
Spinning globe showing age of ocean crust - NOAA
Plate Tectonics - The cause of earthquakes - great graphics!
Tectonic and paleogeographic maps (and Grand Canyon)
 Good Plate Tectonics notes from Volcano World.  Click on arrow at bottom to go on to each section. 

 



Minerals  
Hints for pre-lab mineral quiz
Online Minerals Lecture Test 

Crystal Structure Movies
The Mineral Gallery
World Wide Mineral Link Collection
Physical Characteristics of Minerals
Minerals, Magmas, and Volcanic Rocks.  Includes good diagrams of silicate tetrahedra.
Gems and Precious Stones Internet Course
Mineral formula database
Rocks and minerals in thin section
Minerals in thin section - is it working?
Smithsonian Gem and Mineral Collection
Mineral Museum in Paris
The World of Amber

Igneous Rocks
Ancient Lava Flows and Plutons



Hints for pre-lab igneous quiz
Igneous rock chart.  
Print out and bring to lab.
Online Igneous Rocks and Volcanoes Lecture Test

Minerals, Igneous Rocks and Volcanoes web homework 

Minerals, Magmas, and Volcanic Rocks.  Includes classification and good photos of igneous rocks.
See  Petroglyph - An interactive program which simulates looking at thin sections with a petrographic microscope
Atlas of Igneous and Metamorphic Rocks, Minerals, and Textures


Volcanoes

Please print out movie notes and bring to class: Volcanoes - Exploring the Restless Earth
Volcano Research and Writing Assignment 
 Volcano Information Page Information on currently erupting volcanoes. 
QuickTime movie of Popocatepetal eruption
Movies of volcanic eruptions and pillow lava formation

Weathering

Soils

     

Weathering slides - Part 1 ,  Part 2 - Duke Univ.
Main Index for Weathering Catalogue
Weathering and Soil - John Butler, U. Houston
Weathering of Granite and origin of sediment - GA Southern
Chemical Weathering of Marble at the mall
Small-scale weathering in Tunisia
Karst in Slovenia
Weathering and Karst
Virtual Geomorphology
Weathering of Rocks and Minerals
Earth Science - Weathering and Erosion

Sedimentary Rocks

Sedimentary Structures and Stratigraphic Features
Hints for pre-lab sedimentary quiz
Online Sedimentary Rocks and Weathering Lecture Test

USGS Bedform Sedimentology Site - images and movies
Quick Time movies of bedforms
Landforms
Metamorphic Rocks
Metamorphic Rock pictures

Hints for pre-lab metamorphic rock quiz
Online Metamorphic Rocks Lecture Test

Atlas of Igneous and Metamorphic Rocks, Minerals, and Textures

     

Hydrologic Cycle, Running Water, Erosion, and Sediment Transport
Groundwater

Please print out movie notes and bring to classThe Great River

Georgia Geology and Hydrology Online Assignment 

To Hydrologic Cycle, Running Water, and Groundwater Online Lecture Test
 See this neat site on the Water Cycle with Shockwave! 
Flood damage and related features in Albany, GA
Hydrology and Flooding - annotated references with links
Mississippi River flooding
U.S. Geological Survey Water Resources Branch, Georgia 
Current Georgia hydrology
Past monthly reports on Georgia hydrology


Crustal Deformation
     

Geologic Structures - U. Texas, El Paso
Structural Geology Lab - U. Texas, El Paso
Structure models -  U. Texas, El Paso
Digital relief map of the U.S.
Color landform atlas of the U.S.
Shaded relief map of Georgia
Structural Geology Slide Set
 Radar imagery and text of folded  mountains in the Apppalachians near Sunbury, PA. 
 Print out the image and draw in the correct  fold axis symbols in the proper locations.

Geology of Georgia


Please print out for lab November 19:

Geology and Geography of Georgia Lab

Stone Mountain Field Trip Worksheet
Print this out and work on it in the field.
Mount Arabia oblique air photo
Map of major Georgia faults
Georgia Southern University pages on Geology of Georgia
Satellite image of Georgia - Color Composite, 1996
 Mountain building 
     
     
 Ocean Floor
     


Scientific American article - Three types of continental margins around North America,  with computer-generated images of the seafloor
Satellite altimetry of oceans - NOAA
Deep submergence vehicle - ALVIN
How deep can they go? - Nice diagram!
Educational materials associated with Ocean Planet exhibit at Smithsonian


Shorelines
See videos:
	
	The Beach - A River of Sand
	Portrait of a Coast
	

     

Mass Wasting
     
Mass Wasting links and class notes - Univ. of Texas, El Paso


Links to other geology sites
Smithsonian Museum of Natural History
Try the "Ask-A-Geologist" service offered by the U.S. Geological Survey.  If you have an e-mail account, try sending e-mail to this address: 
ask-a-geologist@octopus.wr.usgs.gov
Old Assignments

Assignment 1 - Spring 1997 
Writing a student web page - instructions and grading information
Writing Web Pages - An Introduction to HTML for DeKalb College Students 
Assignment 1 - part 1 (Spring 1996)  
Assignment 1 - part 2 (Spring 1996)  
Assignment 3 (Spring 1996)



Return to Georgia Geoscience On-line
Credits
 
 
Copyright Pamela J. W. Gore, 1994, 1997, 1998
This page was created by Dr. Pamela J. W. Gore
Department of Geology 
Georgia Perimeter College,	 Clarkston Campus
555 North Indian Creek DriveClarkston, GA  30021-2396.  
pgore@gpc.peachnet.edu

First version created September 1994
Modified November 23, 1998
Modified May 25, 2000
Modified November 20, 2000
