


CSc 4210/6210 Computer Architecture Syllabus



 
CSc 4210/6210 Computer Architecture Syllabus

Summer Semester, 2000

Computer Number: 1174 (undergrad) / 2124 (graduate)
Classroom: 327-G
Time: 4:45-7:30 p.m. Mondays and Wednesdays

Instructor: Dr. Michael Weeks
Computer Science Department
Office: 732 College of Education building
Office Hours: 2:30 - 4 p.m. Mondays and Wednesdays 

web-page: http://www.cs.gsu.edu/~cscmcw
e-mail: mweeks@cs.gsu.edu
Phone: (404) 651-0660



Teaching Assistant : Mr. Praveen Madiraju
TA's e-mail: mvnpraveen@hotmail.com
TA's office: 796 College of Education building
TA's office hours: 10 - 1 Tuesdays and Thursdays





See Attached Calendar
FINAL EXAM
The Final Exam will be given in the above classroom on 
Monday, August 7, at 5-7 p.m.


TEXT
M. Morris Mano.  Computer System Architecture.  3rd Ed.  Prentice Hall
1993.  (Required.)

PREREQUISITES
CSc 3210 Computer Organization and Programming (assembly
language) plus its prerequisites which include Math 2420 Discrete Mathematics
(discrete structures applicable to computer science, number bases, logic,
sets, Boolean algebra, graph theory).  Note the prerequisite CSc 3210 is
required - IF YOU DO NOT HAVE CSc 3210 (OR ITS EQUIVALENT FROM ANOTHER
INSTITION) ON YOUR TRANSCRIPT, WITHDRAW FROM THIS COURSE NOW. 

CONTENT
Logic design, combinatorial and sequential circuits,
micro-operations, computer organization and design, programming a basic
computer, controllers and micro-programmed control, central processing unit,
bit slicing, input-output devices, memory. Additionally, as time permits,
pipelining, reduced instruction sets (RISC), and VLIW (Very Long Instruction 
Word). (See the outline for important dates and notices)

ATTENDANCE

Attendance is vital to success in this class. Roll will be taken during class, 
and a late student will be counted as absent. If a student is marked absent 2 
or more classes in a row then he (or she) may be dropped from this class. 
Anyone missing approximately 10% of the classes without notifying the 
professor in advance and obtaining the professor's concurrence may be 
withdrawn from the course or receive a lower (possibly failing) course 
grade at the discretion of the professor; anyone receiving V.A. benefits 
will be reported to the Dean's Office in these circumstances. Students 
are responsible for all material covered or assigned in class whether or 
not it is in the text.


Students are expected to attend all classes.
Religious holidays as identified by the
Provost and Academic Vice President are one exception; if this is your
case, please identify yourself to me.
See p.52 of the GSU General Catalog for more information.

HOMEWORK

Regular completion of all assignments, especially outside reading
and the accomplishment of assignments, is critical to succeed in this 
course.

GRADING

4210 Students
4 Quizzes will constitute one-third of the course grade.
4 Assignments will constitute one-third of the course grade.
The final exam will constitute one-third of the course grade.

6210 Students
4 Quizzes will constitute one-third of the course grade.
4 Assignments will constitute one-third of the course grade.
The project will constitute one-third of the course grade.

If class is not held on an assignment collection or test date, the 
collecting or testing will take place on the next day class meets. 
Because test dates are scheduled in advance, make-up tests will not be
given. In the case of illness, written evidence from an MD physician or 
a hospital must be submitted on original letterhead stationary. A missed 
test will receive a grade of 0%.
Assignments are due at
the START of class (by the professor's watch) at the professor's desk in 
the classroom on
their due dates.
An assignment turned in after the start of class on its due date 
may be considered by the professor to be late and late penalty may 
be applied to that assignment. 
A missing assignment will receive a grade of 0. 
The nominal grade ranges are: 
  A is 90 to 100%
B is 80 to 89%
C is 70 to 79%
D is 60 to 69%
F is 0 to 59%
Any scaling is done solely at the discretion of the professor.



PLAGIARISM


Students may work alone on assignments or in groups, but only within this 
section of the course. Students working in groups must turn in one assignment 
for the group and must state on that assignment the names of all the students 
in the group who contributed to that assignment; the grade for the assignment
will be divided among the students in the group. For example, if 3 students 
in this section worked on an assignment that receives a grade of 18 (out of
25), then each of the three students will receive a a grade of 6 (out of 25). 
Students who turn in similar assignments without indicating that they 
collaborated, either within this section or outside of this section, will 
be assigned a grade of 0 for that assignment. Students must work individually 
on quizzes and exams without any assistance from persons or things. Any 
student found to be cheating on an examination will receive a score of 0 
for that exam. It is the student's responsibility to protect work from 
copying. No outside help is permitted. If a book or paper is used, it 
must be referenced and not copied. Plagiarized work is determined solely 
by the professor and is graded solely at the professor's discretion.

OFFICE HOURS

Office hours and the office location are given at the top. To schedule an 
appointment outside of these hours, contact the instructor with 3 suggested 
dates and times when you can meet, and be prepared to meet at one of those 
times. Office hours may be canceled occasionally because of meetings, 
seminars, talks, conferences, etc. Office hours for the Teaching Assistant 
will be given in class.

CSC 6210
The schedule for CSc 6210 is the same as that for 4210. You will present your 
project to the class on the date it is due. 
LATE WORK
Unless otherwise specified in class, work will be due on the date given 
in the attached calendar. 
Late work will be accepted by the instructor at the instructor's discretion. 
A late penalty of 10%  will be applied for work turned in late, 
within one 
week of the original due date. After this, late work will not be accepted.
Additional points may be deducted for errors. 
Late copies of any work due during the last 3 classes will not be 
accepted so that the grades can be turned in on time.




POP QUIZZES

may be given to the class,
at the instructor's discretion, therefore it is important to attend all
classes. These pop quizzes (if any are given) will factor into the quiz/test
grade. If you score below an 80% score on a pop quiz, it indicates that you need
to dedicate more time to studying the material.


Notes: All dates are subject to change. 



