






INTRODUCTION TO LA RAZA STUDIES - Spring 2000 Syllabus



 



Professor 
    of La Raza Studies:   
    Summary  |  Courses Taught  |  Committee 
    Work  |  Menu



 
  
  SPRING 2000 
    SYLLABUS 
INTRODUCTION TO LA RAZA STUDIES 
LARA 
    215.01  Schedule No. 26375 
1310-1400 
    p.m. Mondays, Wednesdays & Fridays    Gym 213


Professor 
    Jose B. Cuellar, Ph.D.    
    
    Office: Psychology 422 
Office Hours: Mondays & Wednesdays between 11 am and 
    12 pm 
or by appointment 
Office phone: 415.338.6044 
E-mail: josecuel@sfsu.edu


  
BRIEF COURSE 
  DESCRIPTION. 
  This course serves as an introduction to the history, methodology, philosophy, 
  and structure of La Raza Studies as an academic endeavor.  The emphasis 
  is on the relations between La Raza community and institutions of higher education.  
  This course is required for La Raza Studies majors and minors.  It is also 
  an excellent elective for those in other majors who need greater knowledge of 
  this nationís fastest growing population. 
  This courseís learning strategy includes a mix of faculty lectures, audio-visual 
  presentations, student discussions and small group activities, with a selection 
  of required readings and writings.  This course also provides you with 
  a community service learning (CSL) option. 
OBJECTIVES:

    * Critically comprehend a number of seminal scientific and humanistic writings 
    on past and present conditions and concerns of La Raza communities in the 
    United States. 
    * Gain a holistic overview of the multidisciplinary and multiethnic nature 
    of La Raza Studies. 
    * Develop a fundamental appreciation of the multiple methodological strategies 
    for collecting, and theoretical perspectives for analyzing qualitative and 
    quantitative information on some important issues concerning the various age, 
    class, racial, cultural, geographic, gender and sexual segments of La Raza. 
    
    * Improve essential critical thinking, reading, speaking and writing skills. 
    
REQUIREMENTS AND 
    POLICIES: 
REQUIRED PARTICIPATION.   The course presentations and discussions 
    are essential for developing the necessary skills and understandings.  
    All are required to attend every class and small group discussion meetings. 
    Failure to be present and participate in more than four meeting without 
    written explanation can result in failure to pass.

REQUIRED READINGS.  
  You must read the following books during this course of study: 
  Bonilla, Frank, Edwin Meléndez, Rebecca Morales, and Maria del los Angeles 
  Torres.  Eds.  Borderless Borders: U.S. Latinos Latin Americans, 
  and the Paradox of Interdependence.  Philadelphia:  Temple 
  University Press, 1998. 
  Castillo-Speed, Lillian.  Ed. Latina: Women's Voices from the Borderlands.   
  NY:  A Touchstone Simon & Schuster, 191995. 
  Darder, Antonia and Rodolfo D. Torres.  The Latino Studies Reader: Culture, 
  Economy, & Society.  Malden, MS: Blackwell Publishers Inc., 1998. 
  
  Delgado, Richard and Jean Stefancic.  Eds.  The Latino/a Condition: 
  A Critical Reader.   New York and London: New York University 
  Press, 1998. 
REQUIRED WRITING.  
    This course requires three types of writing: an autobiographical essay, article 
    abstracts, and either a research report or community service learning report.  
    Each type of writing earns the number of points noted. 
Twelve One-Page Abstracts Of Articles (2 Points Each).  Summarizing 
    or abstracting articles of various types and subjects is an academically valuable 
    skill.  This assignment will help you develop your ability to summarize 
    and analyze qualitative and quantitative information presented in scientific 
    and humanistic writings.  Each week you must submit a one page typewritten 
    abstract (summary) of an article of your choice from the required readings.  
    The first abstract is due on Feb 14 . 
One Five-Page Reflexive Autobiographical Essay (10 Points).  In 
    order to develop a keener sense of self and a greater reflexive insight into 
    the personal important issues, you must write a four to five (typed double-spaced) 
    page reflexive autobiographical essay titled something like "Where I'm Coming 
    From to La Raza Studies"  This is due on Mar 15 . 
One Ten-Page Community Service Learning Project or Research Project Report 
    (20) Points).  You have the option.  You must submit a ten-page 
    (double-spaced) report based on journal fieldnotes documenting your (no less 
    than 20) hours of volunteer work as an intern with an approved La Raza community 
    service agency (attend the CSL Fair), or on a research project.  Community 
    service learning is a commitment of La Raza Studies to systematically share 
    our educational resources with the community. The report is due May 15.

REQUIRED ASSESSMENTS.  
  Satisfactory completion of this course requires satisfactorily completing the 
  midterm and final assessment. 
Midterm Assessment (20 Points).  The midterm assessment includes 
  different kinds of written responses to questions (multiple-choice, fill-ins, 
  true/false, matching, and short essay) that assess your critical understanding 
  of the material presented during the first half of the course. It is designed 
  to assess how well you can recollect, synthesize and summarize the most important 
  information encountered.  The midterm assessment is scheduled for Mar 
  24. 
Final Assessment (30 Points).  The final assessment is comprehensive 
  and take-home, but otherwise similar to the midterm. The final assessment 
  is due on May 24. 
Extra Credit.  Extra points may be earned by submitting additional 
  abstracts. 
FINAL COURSE GRADE.

    The final grade is based on the total number of points accumulated as follows:


  



100 (or more)= A+
89-92= B+
77-80= C+
65-68= D+
56 (or fewer) = F


97-99= A
85-88= B
73-76= C
61-64= D



93-96= A-
81-84= B-
69-72=C-
57-60= D-





 

  
  








 
Top 
        of Page
Go 
        to Previous Page

 



 



      
      
  



