

Sociology and the Internet Syllabus






 Course
    Portal
Notice Board
Course
    Syllabus
Electronic
    Communication
    Requirement
Exercises
[1] [2] [3]
[4] [5] [6]
Research
    Paper
WebCT
    Bulletin Board
WebCT
    Chat Room

SOCIOLOGY AND THE
    INTERNET
Robert E. Wood
    Department of Sociology, Anthropology and Criminal Justice
    Spring Semester 2000
The explosive growth of the
    internet has provided sociologists with new tools for carrying out sociological research
    and with a new subject for sociological investigation. This course is designed both to
    increase student skills in using the resources of the internet to do sociology and also to
    explore the emerging field of the sociology of cyberspace.

Course Description. This course
    will combine classroom and computer lab sessions. Attendance at all classes and labs is
    important; do not take this course if you are unable to attend daily. Assignments include
    six exercises designed to develop internet skills; an electronic communication requirement
    designed to explore different types of computer-mediated communication; a research paper
    on how a social group is using the internet to bring about social change; and two quizzes
    on lecture and reading materials. Students will be expected to spend at least three
    hours on the internet each week outside of class, working on the assignments and the
    research paper, and exploring the internet. If you do not have internet access from
    home, it is incumbent on you to schedule adequate time in the computer labs on campus.
Most of the readings in this course are
    available online, and can be accessed simply by clicking on the titles (hypertext links)
    on the online syllabus. They then may be read online (this is recommended for those with
    hypertext links built in); downloaded onto a disk or onto the hard drive of your personal
    computer; or printed out directly.  Assigned readings are not to be printed out
    in BSB 117 during class lab time.  Browsing sites
    should be explored online before the class for which they are assigned. Several recommended
sites call up radio shows on the internet from PBS radio archives
    (these require the RealPlayer plugin).
Requirements.  The Electronic Communication Requirement involves the
    use of email, listserves, WebCT bulletin boards and WebCT chat rooms.  We will use
    all of these types of computer-mediated communication to conduct the business of this
    course, and we will analyze the pros and cons of each.
Internet exercises
    designed to increase your web skills include:
Exercise 1: Basic Internet Skills
Exercise 2:
    Essay on Virtual Communities (with downloaded text and images)
Exercise 3:
    Online Bibliographic and Web Searching: Preliminary Results for Your Research Papers
Exercise 4:
    Sociology Virtual Tour
Exercise 5:
    Doing Data Analysis and Testing Hypotheses Online
Exercise 6:
    Creating Your Own Web Page
The Internet and Social Change
    Research Project will involve exploring and analyzing how the internet is
    being used by a specific group of people to bring about some form of social change. You
    will be asked to explore the degree to which a virtual community can be said to
    exist for the group you have chosen and the degree to which the group is successfully
    using the internet to take collective action to bring about social change. The papers must
    be prepared in HTML format, ready for uploading onto the class website. 
Course grades will be determined as follows:
    Electronic Communication Requirement (10%); Exercises (45%); Virtual Community Research
    Paper (25%); Quizzes (10%) and class attendance and participation (10%; no more than 2
    absences and regular participation showing preparedness).  Inadequate class
    attendance and/or inadequate participation in class discussions (both online and offline)
    will result in a grade penalty. Students may earn up to five extra credit points by
    presenting their research findings at the joint Sociology-Psychology poster session on
    Friday, April 28th.
All students are expected to participate in the class
    bulletin boards and chat rooms as specified in various class assignments.  These
    portions of the course are located on the New Brunswick WebCT server and require students
    to set up a username and password.  Keep a record of yours handy!  I will be
    available after class (11:00-12:00 and in the afternoon, 3:00-4:00) to discuss course
    issues and to provide computer assistance for those who need it. Occasional online office
    hours in one of the course's chat rooms will also be scheduled.   I encourage you to
    raise general issues on the class listserv and bulletin board; more specific questions may
    be addressed to me via email at wood@crab.rutgers.edu
The course portal is located at http://camden-www.rutgers.edu/~wood/445syl.html
All students should check the Instructor's
    Notice Board regularly for updated assignments and other course-related news.
 
Course Outline
check
    the Instructor's Notice Board for day-by-day assignments
I. Introduction: Learning Basic Internet Skills


Browser
      Skills (opening URLs; hypertext links; moving around; bookmarking;
      downloading files and images and importing them into wordprocessing programs)
Using Email and Listservs (handling your
      email account; organizing messages in folders; copying and moving files; subscribing and
      unsubscribing to listservs; searching listserv data bases)
Using Bulletin Boards and Chat Rooms (we will
      use WebCT to communicate outside of class and to familiarize ourselves with these forms of
      interactivity on the internet)
On-line Bibliographic Searches (using the
      internet to use libraries more effectively)
Internet Searching and Web Page Evaluation (finding
      and evaluating what you want on the internet)
Browse:

Searching and Evaluating World Wide Web
        Information (Ann Scholz-Crane, Paul Robeson Library)
Internet Guides, (Milner
        Library, Illinois State University), including Web Search Engine
        Comparison Chart
WebTeacher
        Internet Tutorials


II. The Digital Revolution: Computers, the Internet,
    and Society 

 "The Titanic, Pizza Delivery,
      Community Development, and the Internet, by Randy Stoecker
"The Internet
      Wears Out Its Welcome," by Steve Lohr
"Welcome to
      the Internet, the First Global Colony," by Steve Lohr
"The Future Will
      Resume in 15 Days," by Frank Rich

Browse:
"Net
        Timeline" (PBS Life on the Internet series)
Hobbes' Internet
        Timeline 
The Geography of
        Cyberspace
Critical
        Views of the Internet 

In-Class video excerpts from the PBS
      series, Triumph of the Nerds (website contains
      full transcripts)  Nerds 2.01: A Brief
      History of the Internet (website contains a useful "glossary of geek"
      and other resources)

III. Cyberculture and Virtual Communities 

"A Slice
      of Life in My Virtual Community," by Howard Rheingold
"A Rape
      in Cyberspace: How an Evil Clown, A Haitian Trickster Spirit, Two Wizards, and a Cast of
      Dozens Turned a Database Into a Society," by Julian Dibbell
"Communities
      in Cyberspace," by Peter Kollock and Marc Smith 
"Is
      there a there in cyberspace?" by John Perry Barlow
"Virtual
      Communities: Abort, Retry, Failure?" by Jan Fernback and Brad Thompson
"Virtuality
      and Its Discontents: Searching for Community in Cyberspace," by Sherry Turkle
"The
      Economics of Online Cooperation: Gifts and Public Goods in Cyberspace," by Peter
      Kollock
"Cyberspace and
      Disadvantaged Communities: The Internet as a Tool for Collective Action" by
      Christopher Mele


Browse:
Rules of
        "Netiquette"
Resource Center for
        Cyberculture Studies (look over the Annotated Bibliography and other parts of this
        valuable website; you will even find this course listed)
CyberSoc
        Annotated Bibliography on Virtual Communities
Virtual
        Communities (CyberStudies Resources WebRing)
"Secrets
        of Successful Web Communities: 9 Timeless Design Principles for Community-Building,"
        by Amy Jo Kim (note the use of screen scans)


IV. Sociological Resources on the Web I: Selected
    Informational Sites 

A Sociological Tour Through Cyberspace

Anthropology
      Resource Page
Criminal Justice
      Links
The U.S. Census Bureau website,
      including the 1999
      Statistical Abstract of the United States
U.S. Federal
      Government Social Statistics Briefing Room
Population Reference Bureau
Tool Shed
      (Data Sources and Research Tools) 

Recommended: Rob Kling, "The Internet for
        Sociologists"


V. Identities and Relationships on the Internet


"Session with the
      Cybershrink: an Interview with Sherry Turkle," by Herb Brody
"Who
      Am We?" by Sherry Turkle
"The
      Presentation of Self in Electronic Life: Goffman on the Internet," by Hugh Miller
"Researchers
      Find Sad, Lonely World in Cyberspace," by Amy Harmon
"Misunderstanding
      New Media," by Howard Rheingold

Browse:
"The Net
        and Netizens: The Impact the Net has on People's Lives," by Michael Hauben
Gender and Race in
        Cyberspace

Recommended: WHYY Radio Times
      program on "Social Relations and the Internet," discussing HomeNet study and
      more (requires Real Audio or RealPlayer; skip to second hour)

VI. Sociological Resources on the Web II: Selected
    Interactive Sites 

Compare up to 7
      countries along a variety of variables on InfoNation
Create cross-tabulations
      from the General Social Survey (GSS) and other databases
Create population
      pyramids and see how they change over time
Call up 1990 census
      data by zipcodes, census tract, states, and other units 
Get 1998
      county data from the Government Information Sharing Project
Create
      tables of selected international country data from the U.S. Census Bureau

VII. Privacy and the Internet:
    Surveillance, Crime, Encryptation and Spamming 

Browse:
New York Times
      articles on Privacy in the Digital Age
Center for Democracy and
      Technology
Electronic Privacy Information
      Center
Americans for Computer
      Privacy (mainly concerned with encryptation policy)

VIII. Censorship and the Internet: Pornography, Hate
    Speech, Dissent 

Public Agenda
      website on Internet Speech and Privacy (explore)
"The Future of
      Free Speech on the Corporate Internet," Corporate Watch website (include linked
      article by McChesney)


Browse:
The
          Cyberporn Debate
Pornography,
          Obscenity, Censorship and the Communications Decency Act
Global Internet Liberty Campaign
Blue Ribbon Campaign
          for online freedom of speech, press, and association 






Recommended: WHYY Radio Times
      program on "Freedom of Speech in Cyberspace," with Mike Godwin, author of Cyber
      Rights: Defending Free Speech in the Digital Age and WHYY Radio Times
      program on privacy in the computerized workplace with attorney Mark Dichter
      and author Andre Bacard (requires Real Audio or RealPlayer) 

IX. HTML and Web-Page Making: Creating Your Own Web
    Page 

Elementary HTML Language:
      creating a web page by writing your own code
Accessing HTML coding in existing web documents
Downloading and importing images and screen scans
Using Netscape Composer to construct your web page
Putting your web page on the internet

X. Politics and the Web 

"Birth of a Digital Nation,"
      by Jon Katz
"The
      Internet Changes Dictatorship's Rules," by Barbara Crossette
"Presidential
      Candidates Wage War on Internet," by Laura Meckler
Powerpoint
      presentation on the readings



Browse: 
NetAction
AFLCIO Executive
        Paywatch Site
Electronic Policy Network


XI. The Internet as Marketplace 

Video: High Stakes in Cyberspace
"New
      Rules for the New Economy," by Kevin Kelly
"The
      Information Superhighway: Paving Over the Public," interview with Herbert Schiller
"The Net
      Imperative," The Economist
"Surging
      Number of Patents Engulfs Internet Commerce," by Saul Hansell
"Should the Web be
      Tax-Free?" by Robert Kuttner
"Real
      or Virtual? You Call It," by Stuart Elliott


Browse: 
Corporate Watch: the
        watchdog on the web
Economic
        Theory on the Internet (Transaction Net)

Recommended: WHYY Fresh Air program on Netscape's
      Challenge to Microsoft with Joshua Quittner and Michella Slatalla,
      authors of Speeding the Net: The Inside Story of Netscape and How It Challenged
      Microsoft

XII. Education and the Internet 

"Digital Diploma Mills: The
      Automation of Higher Education," by David F. Noble also: part 2 and part 3
"O.K.,
      Schools Are Wired.  Now What?"

Browse:
"Thinking About the Internet
        Pedagogically" by Robert Wood (explore)
Electronic
        School online magazine
Project
        VILLAGE's educational websites
Rutgers Library
        Education Links 
Recommended: WHYY Radio Times program
        on "Academic Cheating and the Internet"  with Professor Robert
        Wood (requires Real Audio or RealPlayer)


XIII. The Internet and Inequality: Domestic and
    International 

Resources on the
      Digital Divide (explore links at Eastern Sociological Society Computer Committee site)

Browse:
Praxis:
        Resources for Social and Economic Development
The
        Virtual Library on International Development
Project VILLAGE at
        Rutgers-Camden


XIV. The Internet in Process: A Contested Future


"Where is the
      Digital Highway Really Heading? The Case for a Jeffersonian Information Policy," by
      Michell Kapor
"The
      Information Highway from Hell: A Worst-Case Scenario," by Jeff Johnson 
"Looking Backward and Forward at the Internet,"
      by Jon Guice (The Information Society 14, 1998)
"The
      Soul of the Next New Machine: Humans," by Rob Fixmer (discussion of Ray Kurzweil's The
      Age of the Spiritual Machine: When Computers Exceed Human Intelligence)
Recommended:
      WHYY Radio Times interview
      with Ray Kurzweil



Return to the Sociology and the
    Internet course portal
The URL for this syllabus is:
    http://www.camden.rutgers.edu/~wood/445course.html
Updated January 13, 2000






