






George Mason University


Economics 361, George
Mason University, Dr. Carrie Meyer
Economic Development of Latin
America
Spring 2002, Ent 174 MWF 8:30-9:30AM
cmeyer@gmu.edu,
tel: 703-993-1143,
webpage: //mason.gmu.edu/~cmeyer/
Office Hours 9:30-10:30 MWF
Course Goals:
By the end of the semester students should be
familiar with the economic history and institutions of Latin America and
key development issues such as industrialization, inflation, trade, privatization,
foreign investment, the agricultural sector. The course will approach topics
from the perspectives of both economic history and development theory,
with an eye toward the institutions and cultural norms specific to Latin
America.
Skill requirements and prerequisites:
Economics 103 and 104 are prerequisites to the
course, but economics majors may also want to complete their intermediate
theory courses before taking this course.  Students from outside of
economics who have more background in Latin America may take get permission
to take the course without the prerequisites.  .
All students should have an email account. 
Accounts are available to all GMU students.  Email is the best way
to contact your instructor.
Familiarity with the World Wide Web will also
be necessary to complete the course -- particularly to conduct research
for the term paper.  The professor's webpage contains links to assist
you in that research. (See term paper below.)
Required Texts:
Cardosa, Eliana and Ann Helwege.
Latin
America's Economy: Diversity, Trends, and Conflicts. Cambridge, Mass:
MIT Press, 1995. (paper)
Franko, Patrice.
The Puzzle
of Latin American Economic Development. Rowman and Littlefield, 1999. 
(paper)
 
 
Course Requirements:
2 Midterms @ 20% each, Essay type
Final @ 30% Essay type
Paper @ 20% 10-15 typed pages
of text.
Participation 10%
We will have 2 in-class midterms
and the final will be held at the regularly scheduled time.
Term Paper (10-15 pages, 2500
words of text minimum):
For the term paper you should
choose a country in Latin America and a particular issue to study for that
country; for example: "Privatization in Brazil," "The Agricultural Sector
in Mexico," "Trade Policies in Chile," "Inflation in Argentina," "Capital
Markets in Chile," "Stabilization experience in Bolivia," "Mexico and NAFTA,"
"The Role of Oil in the Venezuelan Economy," "The Steel Industry in Brazil."
The paper must include relevant
background on the country as well as economic history of the issue you
are studying. If your topic is trade - review the history of trade; if
your topic is inflation - review the financial history; etc. Additionally,
you must find a recent newspaper or magazine article (dated after the beginning
of the semester) that relates to your country and topic in some way. See
Wall
Street Journal, Christian Science Monitor, New York Times, The Economist,
U.S. News and World Report, or LANIC on the Web for articles by country. 
Integrate the article into your report and turn the article in with
the paper.
Wiarda and Cline (on reserve)
is a collection of country studies. Although they focus on politics, check
the references for good historical sources. For-up-to date information
on your country, check the links on my homepage. In particular the Economist
Intelligence Unit should be very useful. Many other useful links are included
on my homepage.  Your textbooks and the books recommended on the syllabus
should also be useful sources.
Your paper should include an introduction
that indicates where the paper is going and a conclusion that summarizes
major points. Please try to make your paper well organized and clear. Graphs
and tables may be included in the 10-15 pages, but you need at least 2500
words of text.
The paper should also include
a title page and an outline in pre-text matter. (Please staple or clip
your paper in the upper left hand corner. Please don't use plastic covers
or folders.
Proper referencing will be an
important criteria for your grade.  You must cite your sources
throughout your paper with the author, copyright date and page number,
for example: (Baer 1989: 120-24). You must also include a list of references
at the end in alphabetical order. The Chicago Manual of Style is a good
standard to follow -- and available on line.  See: http://wac.gmu.edu/students/style.html. 
When you quote directly from your source the quotation must appear in quotation
marks with the page number indicated.  Whenever you are paraphrasing
and use more than 6-8 words in a row identical to your referenced author
you should be using quotation marks. When you paraphrase an authors words
and ideas you should, whether or not you are citing specific facts, cite
the author.
A proposal for your paper in the
form of a brief outline must be submitted immediately following spring
break. I will OK this and/or make comments and return it to you. Please
save this proposal, with my comments and resubmit it with your final paper.
Your paper topic must be approved.
Papers are due on or before the
last day of class.
Class Participation
You are expected to keep up with
the reading and participate in discussions. There may also be some optional
student presentations. The participation grade is not necessarily related
to how much you talk in class. However, relevant questions, constructive
comments, and alternative points of view are appreciated -- so is attendance
and reflections relating readings to class discussion.
Topics
1. Latin America in the World
Economy: An Overview
    Cardoso and
Helwege Ch1; Franko Ch1, Meyer (on reserve), pp. 17-24
2. What is Development? 
Measuring Development and Theories of Development
    Cardoso and
Helwege Ch3; Franko Ch1
3. Historical Roots
    Cardoso and
Helwege Ch2; Franko Ch2
4. International Trade and Development
in Latin America
    Franko Ch
3 pp 52-55; Ch8, pp. 212-215, Todaro Ch12
5. Import Substitution Industrialization
and State Enterprise
    Cardoso and
Helwege Ch4, Sections 1-5; Franko Ch3
6. The Debt Crisis and Muddling
Through
    Cardoso and
Helwege Chs5, 7, Franko, Ch4
7. International Finance and Inflation
Theory
    Cardoso and
Helwege Chs 6; Franko, Ch5
8. The Liberalization of Trade
and Export Promotion
    Franko Ch8
9. Privatization, Deregulation,
and Globalization
    Franko Ch
6, Ch7; Webpage: Economic Globalization in Latin America
10. The Mexican Crisis of 1994
    Franko, Ch7
11.  Poverty and Inequality,
Social Indicators
    Cardoso and
Helwege Ch 9, Franko Ch 11; Webpage: Globalization & Inequality in
Latin America
12. Agriculture, Rural Development
and Agrarian Reform
    Cardoso and
Helwege Ch10 (Land Reform);  Franko Ch10
 
 
Additional Useful Texts:
General
Edwards, Sebastian.  Crisis
and Reform in Latin America, Oxford, 1995.
Meyer, Carrie.  The Economics
and Politics of NGOs in Latin America. 1999. (on reserve)
Todaro, Michael.
Economics
Development. (on reserve)
Meier, Gerald. Leading Issues
in Economic Development.
Bauer, P. T. Dissent on Development
(Harvard,
1979).
Lewis, Oscar. Five Families.
Harper & Row (paper)
Latin America - Economic History
Bulmer-Thomas. Economic History
of Latin America, Cambridge U. Press, 1994 ISBN: 0-521-368723
Thorp, Rosemary. Progress, Poverty and Exclusion: An Economic History
of Latin America in the 20th Century, Johns Hopkins Press for the IDB,
1998.
Furtado, Celso.
Economic Development
of Latin America.
Frank, Andre Gunder,
Capitalism
and Underdevelopment of Latin America Cambridge, 1970.
Glade, William P.
The Latin
American Economies
Country Studies
Wiarda, Howard J. and Harvey F.
Kline. Latin American Politics and Development, Westview, 1990. (on
reserve)
Economic and Social Progress
in Latin America, Yearly Report.  IDB,
Johns Hopkins U. Press.
Baer, Werner. The Brazilian
Economy: Growth and Development 3rd ed. Praeger, 1989. (paper) (on
reserve)
Informal Sector
DeSoto, Hernando.
The Other
Path 1989.
Portes, Alejandro; M. Castells;
and L. Benton. The Informal Economy. Baltimore, Johns Hopkins, 1989.
Macro Policy- Stabilization
Dornbusch, Rudiger and Helmers,
F. L. The Open Economy: Tools for Policymakers in Developing Countries
(The World Bank with Oxford University Press, 1988).
McKinnon, Money and Capital
in Economic Development
Nazmi, Nader Economic policy and stabilization in Latin America,
1996.
Sachs, Jeffrey.
Developing
Country Debt and the World Economy
Trade
Grinspun, Ricardo and Maxwell
Cameron. The Political Economy of the North American Free Trade.
St Martin's press 1993.
Bhagwati, Jagdish.
Protectionism.
MIT press, 1989.
Krueger, Anne O.
Trade and
Employment in Developing Countries: Synthesis and Conclusions. U. of
Chicago, 1983.
Agricultural Development
Eicher, Carl K. and Staatz, John
M. Agricultural Development in the Third World. 2nd edition, Johns
Hopkins U. Press, 1990.
Meyer, Carrie A.
Land Reform
in Latin America, Praeger, 1989.
Ruttan, Vernon.
Why Food Aid?
Johns
Hopkin's paperback, 1993.
Schultz, T.W., Transforming
Traditional Agriculture
Environment and Natural Resources
Maguire and Brown,
Bordering
on Trouble, Adler and Adler for WRI, 1986.
Meyer, Carrie A.
Environmental
and Natural Resource Accounting: Where to Begin? Washington, D.C.:
World Resources Institute, 1993.
Panayotou, Theodore,
Green
Markets: The Economics of Sustainable Development, 1993.
World Bank. World Development
Report 1992: Development and the Environment. Washington, D.C.: The
World Bank, 1992.
Foreign Aid
Cassen, Robert.  1994.  Does Aid
Work? 2nd Edition. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Meyer, Carrie A. The Economics and Politics
of NGOs in Latin America.  Westport, CN: Praeger, 1999.
 
 


