

Sociology of Sport



Soc 405 - Sociology of Sport

Course goals
Sport is a physical activity that occurs in a given cultural milieu
 and is socially structured. In this course, we examine:

sport using a sociological perspective. 
its form, its history, its impact on participants and
 society, and vice versa.

Course Requirements
Four examinations will be administered. Each counts 25% of your grade.
The examination format is true-false, multiple choice, and essay.
Examination questions systematically cover required readings (text, reader)
and lectures. Materials covered on each examination are mutually exclusive.
You are permitted to bring 1 page (8 1/2" x 11") of "crib notes" into the
examination. 
The Office of Disability Services requires that the following be added
to the course syllabus.
"If you need course adaptations or accommodations because of a documented
disability or if you have emergency information to share. 
Please contact the Office of Disability Services at Hoskins Library at 974-6087.
This (action) sic will ensure that you are properly registered for services."
My office is 907 McClung. Office hours are from 8:30 A.M. to 4:00 P.M., 
excluding scheduled class(9:05-9:55 am MWF) and advising hours(1-4 pm T) and swim time
(11:30 am to 12:30 pm). Home phone is 690-4167, please do not call after 9:00 P.M.
Office phone is 974-7019. Use voice mail or email  to 
leave messages. I regularly check and return calls.
Required text--Jay J. Coakley. Sport in society: issues and controversies.
7th edition). WCB. McGraw-Hill. Boston. 2001.
Topical Outline
I.   What is the subject-matter of sociology of sport?

A.   Importance of sport, health, and leisure in American society 
B.   Rise of sociology of sport as academic discipline
C.   Are these "universal forms" or "reproductions" of society?

(Much of the literature attempts to define play, game, sport, and
 athletics adhering to a paradigm of categorization wherein sets must be
 mutually exclusive and unambiguous rather than defining sets as fuzzy
 categories.)

Attempts to define play (Anthropological investigations on the nature
of play are not discussed in this course, but the body of literature is 
large.)
Attempts to define games
Attempts to define sport
Attempts to define athletics
Sports as spectacle
Trash sports
Noncompetitive sports

Coakley. Chapter 1 "The sociology of sport: What is it and why study
it?" pp. 2-29.
Coakley. Chapter 2 "Using social theories: What can they tell us about
sports in society?" pp. 30-54.
II.  From Gambol to Game to Grunge


Greeks

Romans

Medieval

History--Sport as a religious activity; as status-group activity; as a
vehicle for controlling the working class;  as a commercial enterprise.


Greeks, Romans, Medieval England, China, Japan, and Colonial America

Coakley. Chapter 3 "A look at the past: How have sports changed
 throughout history?" pp. 56-80.

Rise of Modern Sport in United States--Status life styles, WASPs and
 ethnics, religion, technology, and commercialism



Factors & Modern Sport Characteristics linked to Globalization of Sport
Culture and Sport (Optional section - expand for semester system)

FIRST EXAMINATION (Objective and short essays) -TBA

***
III. Issues of Selection and De-selection in Play, Games and Sport

Anticipatory socialization: American Values & Sports Creed
(Harry Edwards) Reality or Myth

Coakley. Chapter 4 "Sports and socialization." pp.81-108.

Selection into sport


Physical ability -- Aversive socialization versus positive feedback 
Agents of socialization--parents, peers, coaches, school officials,
preachers, and physicians


The Work Routine  

(S) Donald W. Hastings, Suzanne B. Kurth, and Monika Schloder. (1996)
Work routines in the serious leisure career of Canadian and U.S. Masters swimmers.
Avante Vol. 2, No. 3: 73-92.

Socialization into sport  


Gender socialization - Macho vs. feminina 
Gender role transcendence
Gender stereotypes: Role strain versus cognitive balancing 

Coakley. Chapter 5 "Sports and children: Are organized programs
worth the effort?" pp.109-136.

Motives for participation (Youth: Age-informal and formal games (fun,
skills, or winning?) and Adults: Masters Sports)


Reverse socialization
Institutionalization

IV. Sports Lifecourse--The Serious Leisure Career

Sports Participation--Age-linked concepts: age-graded activities,
life cycle, and career -- see bibliography on career paper


Entry
Age-group
Elite (Amateur vs. Professional) 
Exit--Attrition/Burnout; Retirement (Social death versus Rebirth); Withdrawal
Re-entry

SECOND EXAMINATION (Objective and short essays) TBA

Roles in Sport (Coaches and Others)

Coakley.  Chapter 8 "Coaches: How do they fit into sports experiences?"
(5th edition).

Suggested I lecture from this text   COLLEGE SWIMMING COACH

V. Positive consequences of sports participation - Sports participation
and academic performance, aspiration, and collegiate success.
Coakley.  Chapter 10 "Social class: Do money and power matter
 in sports?" pp. 279-310.

Athletes as Role Models
Academic achievement

Coakley. Chapter 14 "Sports in high school and college: Do varsity
sports programs contribute to education?" pp. 417-455.
VI. Mass Media and Gender

Fiction versus Reality

Coakley.  Chapter 12 "Sports and media: Could they survive without
each other? pp.350-384.
THIRD EXAMINATION -- TBA 

Gender -- Myths, Opportunities won and lost

Coakley.  Chapter 8 "Gender and sports: Does equity require
 ideological changes?" pp.202-241.

Race -- Lifestyles, stacking, economics

Coakley.  Chapter 9 "Race and ethnicity: Are they important in sports?" pp. 242-278.
VII. Commercialization of Sport
Coakley.  Chapter 11 "Sports and economy: What are the characteristics
of commercial sports?" pp.311-349.

College Sports

Professional Sports

VIII. Problems in Sport

Cheating -- Kemp versus University of Georgia
Drugs: Performance enhancing and performance debilitating drugs,
 ergogenic aids.

Coakley.  Chapter 6 "Deviance in sport: Is it out of
control?" pp. 137-172.

Gambling -- Tulane
Violence

Coakley.  Chapter 7 "Violence in sports: How does it 
affect our lives?" pp. 173-201.
Coakley.  Chapters 13, 15, & 16.(Optional)
FINAL EXAMINATION- As scheduled
SUGGESTED WEBSITES


Scholarly sport sites-University of Calgary THE SINGLE BEST SITE ON SPORTS

Best site for Swimming Links

For selected sources of information (print & electronic) on sport business prepared 
by faculty at University of Memphis, see:
Sport Business sources


Courses Taught



Undergraduate


Soc 311-Sociology of the Family


Soc 331-Introduction to Research Methods


Soc 405-Sociology of Sport


Soc 462-Population Problems


 Graduate


Soc 531-Methods of Sociological  Research


Soc 563-Demographic Techniques


Soc 534-Adv. Sociological Analysis (formerly taught with Suzanne Kurth)


Soc 665-Advanced Topics in Energy, Environment, and Natural Resources: Inequalities 
in Environmental Risk (formerly taught with Sherry Cable)

Seminar in Growth and Sustainability (with Sherry Cable)





Courses Taught in Physical Education

Advanced Competitive Swimming (Available on request -
 Snail mail)(Coaching resume available on E-Mail request)








Academic Resume



