









Report for 1995 Asian Studies Development Program and NEH Institute on Japanese Culture and Civilization








[About]
[Index]
[Search]
[Other Links]
[Comments/Submissions]


Report for 1995 Asian Studies Development
Program and NEH Institute on Japanese Culture and Civilization
EAST-WEST CENTER AND THE UNIVERSITY OF HAWAII
(5 JUNE - 7 JULY)
Submitted By
Dr. Alison McNeal 
Department of English 
Slippery Rock University

My project's primary purpose is to support and broaden
Slippery Rock University's on-going curriculum development of
Asian Studies. In 1990 and 1991 Dr. Peggy Denning drew together
courses that were already being taught into a curriculum proposal
for an Asian Studies Minor. By 1992, the minor was in place in
the curriculum. Now the job is to develop the faculty, such as
myself, who are not Asian Studies experts and who may not be
familiar with the cultures, languages, and literatures they are
expected to teach. Therefore, the nature of intended curricular
changes must be in the context of limited staffing, budget cost
cuts, and students who often must be guided out of a narrow,
parochial focus.

Nevertheless, I believe that I will be able to develop
Slippery Rock University's curriculum in at least three areas,
SRU's 56 credit hour Liberal Studies program required of all
graduates, the programs in the Department of English including
the B.A. in English, and the Asian Studies Minor. The following
report will highlight those projected curricular changes with the
largest emphasis on the course that I currently have been
teaching: English 248 or "Eastern Literature." The
proposed changes involve a change in the emphasis and direction
in classes that already exist and that I teach or will teach such
as English 101--College Writing I, introductory level literature
courses, and English 248--Eastern Literature. This report also
will explore some ideas for brand new 
courses as part of the over_hauling of our B.A. in English.
These courses would also fit into the Asia Studies Minor and one
would also mesh with the Women's Studies Minor. The attached
bibliography in Japanese Literature, besides being a helpful
classroom tool in the classes that I already teach, will be
particularly useful in developing these courses since the form
used by the Curriculum Committee requires an attached
bibliography.

Liberal Studies

Introductory English Department writing and literature courses
are required of every SRU student. Each student must take College
Writing I and II (or exempt from them) as well as one literature
class selected from a group of four designated literature
classes: Introduction to Fiction, Introduction to Poetry and
Drama, Modern English and American Literature, and Contemporary
English and American Literature. 
The college writing classes are the traditional general
introduction to college writing followed by a class in research
paper writing. Given the freedom that each member of our
department has to select texts and course focus, I plan to offer
Japanese topics via the use of the following text: White, Merry
and Sylvan Barnet, eds. Comparing Cultures: Readings on
Contemporary Japan for American Writers. Boston: Bedford
Books of St. Martin's Press, 1995. Simultaneously, using the
curricular practice already established in the Women's Studies
Minor, I can have the college writing classes that I teach with a
focus on Japan or other Asian countries to be included as credit
in our Asia Studies Minor. 
For the literature classes there are two easily available ways
of changing them to include more works by Japanese authors. The
first and most obvious way is 
to include a Japanese unit in each course. I have taught three
out of the four available classes, and with the wealth of
suggestions I have gathered as a student in this Institute, I
will very easily be able to construct a five week module of
Japanese literature. 
Secondly, the list of four introductory literature classes is
going to be modified. Since I am on the department Curriculum
Committee, I have volunteered to propose a new course to be
substituted for either all four courses or for only the Modernism
class with its focus on such writers as Eliot, Hemingway, Cather,
and Fitzgerald. I can either propose a fairly standard
"Introduction to Literature" class with a large
multi_cultural component consisting of in part, Asian literatures
and themes, or I can propose an "Introduction to World
Literature," designed specifically to include Asian
literatures. In fact, it may be more appropriate to propose both
an Introduction to Literature as well as an upper_division
Introduction to World Literature that could possibly prepare some
students of our department's graduate level World Literature
class. 

B. A. in English and the Asian Studies Minor

The Department of English Curriculum Committee is beginning
its re_thinking of its B. A. program. My primary work and concern
will be with English 248 which I started to teach in the Spring
of 1992. My work with it involves a three-fold plan. First,
working with Dr. Roger Ames' suggestion when he came to SRU's
campus for a workshop, I have attempted to make the class more
restrictive in its scope. To that end, next fall, I plan to
include a sampling of literature from China and Japan only.
Second, I plan to propose a change in the the catalog description
from one that emphasizes only the ancient, classical texts of a
large number of "Eastern" 
countries to one that permits study of recent or contemporary
literatures of a smaller number of countries. 
Third, English 248 is a class that is marginalized within my
department because it is listed only as an elective which means
that it is rarely taken as a course by any of the English majors
whether they are taking the B.A., the B.S. or the B.S. Ed. I plan
to begin by moving its position in the B.A. to a "slot"
where it is at least listed in a block of choices of one of the
degree's requirements. 
Finally, looking ahead into the future development of the
Asian Studies Minor at Slippery Rock as well as the on_going
evolution of the Department of English's programs, I can think of
a number of classes that I could design and teach besides
Introduction to Literature or Introduction to World Literature
that would have a very specific Japanese focus. One would be
"Classic Japanese Literature," and it could focus on a
variety of topics or texts from the Heian to the Medieval period.
Another could be "Contemporary Japanese Novels" and
might use a variety of authors such as Kawabata, Tanizaki,
Soseki, and Oe. Finally, another class might be
"Contemporary Japanese Female Writers" which could mesh
with Department of English programs, the Asian Studies Minor, and
the Women's Studies Minor as well. 
Thus, the impact of my participation in this NEH Institute on
Japanese Civilization and Culture will be immediately felt in the
classes already in the curriculum that I teach, namely College
Writing I, College Writing II, Introduction to Fiction,
Contemporary English and American Fiction, and Eastern
Literature. However, in the more distant future (1996 and 1997),
I plan to propose a number of new courses and use the attached
bibliography in part as support for the following courses: 
Introduction to Literature 
Introduction to World Literature 
Classic Japanese Literature 
Contemporary Japanese Novels 
(Contemporary) Japanese Female Writers

Attachments 
What follows is a list of attachments to show the changes in
my English 248, Eastern Literature class. First, there is a list
of works chosen the first time I taught Eastern Literature.
Second, the Eastern Literature syllabus with the works selected
for the fall 1995 semester follows. Finally, there is a brief
bibliography that I can use in all of the above instances to
support all of classes and the proposals for new ones. It is also
extremely useful because I can update it and shape it over the
course of time that I teach. 
COURSE SYLLABUS 
EASTERN LITERATURE, ENGLISH 248 AA
SPRING 1991

DR . BARBARA WILLIAMS OFFICE 312 A (SWC) 
311 E. Falls St. OFFICE PHONE:738-2373 
New Castle, PA 1610 OFFICE HOURS: T 4:00-6:00 M 10:00-1:00 

Note: This is an important document which can help the student
throughout the course.

COURSE DESCRIPTION:

This is an introductory level reading course that serves to
introduce the student to selected texts of world_wide importance
that were written in what we now geographically refer to as
"The East," in countries such as but not limited to
Arabia, China, Eqypt, Japan, India, Iran, and Israel. Each
country has its own distinctive literature which both embodies
and reflects the deep structure of the culture. Students will be
expected to read these texts for their literary, spiritual,
philosophical, and cultural merit. 

COURSE OBJECTIVES

By the end of the semester, the student will be expected to
know or do the following:

a. discover what the apparent fundamental imperatives are for
each culture;

b. appreciate the cultural differences;

c. make meaning (in Bleich's sense) of the text;

d. appreciate the difficulties involved in adequately
translating these texts;

e. understand the vastness of this area;

f. express and support verbally or in writing possible
interpretations.

REQUIRED TEXTS

These texts are listed here in alphabetical order, not
necessarily in the order in which they will be read. Students are
encouraged to purchase these editions to facilitate classroom
discussion. 
Easwaran, Keknath, ed The Upanishads: A Selection for the
Modern Reader.

Chen, Ellen, trans. The Tao Te Ching: A New Translation
with Commentarv.

Haddaway, Husain, trans. The Arabian Niqhts.

Miller, Barbara S., ed. The Bhagavad-Gita.

Radice, William, ed. Selected Poems (of Rabindranth
Tagore).

Satchidananda, Sri S. trans. The Yoga Sutras of Pataniali.

Waley, Arthur, trans. Analects of Confucius.

Waley, Arthur, ed. The No Plays of Japan.

MATERIALS NEEDED: _

1. one three ring binder

2. college-ruled notebook paper

3. one folder with pockets

COURSE REQUIREMENTS:

1. Essays: Students will be expected to write a number
of short research essays on the texts studied this semester usinq
appropriate MLA guidelines for intext citations where needed and
attached bibliography. Class time will be allotted to these
projects so that students can polish rough drafts.

Note: a) Students will type their final drafts 
b) NO LATE ASSIGNMENTS WILL BE ACCEPTED INCLUDING JOURNALS 

2. Dialogic iournal: Students will keep a journal that
records their thoughts on what they read, their notes to
themselves about what they plan to do in their essays, their
reactions to class discussion, ideas for their essays, and
assigned entries that will be given to them in class.

FORMAT OF JOURNAL

A. All entries for the journals should be labeled with the time
and date.

B. They should be single-spaced except for one line between
separate entries.

C. Use 8 1/2" x 11" college ruled paper

D. Divide each sheet in half vertically and write only in the
left_hand column, single spacing.

E. Write front and back on each sheet of paper and number the
pages just like a book.

F. Use black ink.

G. Create a table of contents for the journal.


CONTENTS OF JOURNAL

The_contents of the journal will fall into the following three
section which students will CLEARLY DIVIDE 
AND LABEL:

Section I: This part will consist of a full and detailed
response or report to EACH class and will be no less than two
full columns (no less than the equivalent of one full page).

Section II: This section contains a detailed responses to EACH
item students read. Students are required to write extensively
about each text read for the courses recording their emotional
reactions, their intellectual guesses, or their simple
appreciation for the language of the texts. Students can also
record their problems or frustrations in reading and
interpreting.

Section III: This section contains in_class entries as well as
out-of-class notes students make to themselves about their
research projects.

USE OF JOURNAL AND JOURNAL GROUPS

Students are expected to meet with each other in their journal
groups outside of class for at least one hour twice a month in
Feb, March, and April and once a month in Jan. and Mav for a
total of eight times.

Each student will pass his or her journal around the group
unti it has been read by all of the members of the group.

Each student reader will comment, add to, question, or discuss
the entries by writing in the right-hand column. Each student
reader must initial his or her comments.

Students must have written responses from each group member
for each of their entries.

The score on the journal is determined by the total number of
pages, the total number of students' comments, the quality of the
entries, and the quality of the comment.

3. Panel Presentations: All students must prepare a
panel presentation to the class. The panel of students will be
considered "experts" on the text under discussion and
will conduct and monitor all classroom discussions of their text,
fielding questions and performing simple out of class research on
any perplexing textual issues that might develop. Students may
use audio/visual aids to enhance their presentation.

EACH PANEL MEMBER WILL TURN IN A ONE PAGE DOUBLE SPACED, TYPED
NARRATIVE DESCRIBING THE ACTIVITIES OF THE GROUP IN PREPARING
THIS PRESENTATION.

The panel's presentation can consist of but not be limited to
the following:

a. A written summary and discussion of one scholarly article
about the work. The panel can use this material as a point of
departure for discussion.

b. Hand-outs (typed, spelled correctly) which will enhance or
direct classroom discussion; this could include a list of
study questions, a catalogue of page numbers where certain
images or scenes occur, an outline of the main points of the
work, or historical background on the work.

c. Activities related to the work and involving the whole
class such as a questionnaire polling the class's opinion about
the theme of the book. If the theme involves the
supernatural, for example, the panel might present a 20 item
survey asking people their opinion of various aspects of the
supernatural.

4. Class Participation All students are expected to
come to class prepared and ready to discuss the assigned text. 
GRADING AND EVALUATION:

Final grades for the course will be based on the following
formula:

First paper 20 pts. 
Following papers 40 pts. 90-100% = A 
Panel 40 pts. 80-91% = B 
Class participation 20 pts. 65-79% = C 
Journal 100 pts. 55-64% = D 
O-54% = F

Total pts: Depends on final number of papers

YOUR ASSIGNMENTS MUST BE TURNED IN ON TIME AND WILL NOT BE
ACCEPTED WITHOUT A MEDICAL EXCUSE.

ATTENDANCE POLICY

If students miss more than two times throughout the semester,
their final grade will be lowered 1/2 letter grade for each
additional absence. It is the student's responsibility to be
prepared for class and to make up all missed assignments. 
DRAFT OF REVISED SYLLABUS

ENGLISH 248, EASTERN LITERATURE

FALL 1995

Dr. Alison Mc Neal Office--312 A 
0--738-2373 Office Hours-- 
H--658-6143

COURSE DESCRIPTION:

This is a course in literature that serves to introduce you to
selected works of literature in translation from the area
generally referred to geographically as the "Far East"
or the "Asian Rim." This semester we will focus on a
comparison and/or contrast of examples of literature from two
major countries and cultures, China and Japan. 
As in most literature classes, we will use various tools of
literary analysis to construct assorted interpretations of the
pieces. We will also read a range of genres, from poetry, short
stories, a novel, to perhaps a play. 
Throughout our study we will look for the universals in the
human condition in China and Japan as expressed in the works that
we will read this semester. We also will examinine the particular

cultural and social contexts of the works that situate them in
a particular time and place. Each country has its own distinctive
literature which both embodies and reflects the deep structure of
the culture. You will be expected to read these works for their
literary and cultural merit. 
Eastern Literature is one of a group of courses offered at SRU
in its Asian Studies Minor.

COURSE OBJECTIVES:

If we focus on the idea of this being a literature
course, then, by the end of the semester you should have greater
facility in interpreting texts and creating meaning from them via
the tools of literary analysis such as formal, subjective, mythic
or psychological criticism. You will also learn to express
verbally or in writing a variety of possible interpretations. 
But since this literature is from two very different cultures,
another goal is that you learn to appreciate the differences, not
only between your culture and China's or Japan's, but also the
cultural, social and historical differences between them
suggested by the readings. REQUIRED TEXTS:

These texts are listed in alphabetical order, not in the
chronological order in which they will be read. 
Chin, Frank The Chinaman Pacific & Frisco R R Co Minneapolis,
Coffee House Press

Keene, Donald, ed Anthology of Japanese Literature
Grove Press, 1955

Ma, Y W and Joseph Lau Traditional Chinese Stories Cheng
& Tsui Company, 1991

Mitsios, Helen, ed New Japanese Voices: The Best Contemporary
Fiction From Japan The Atlantic Monthly Press (Grove/Atlantic),
1991

Tanaka, Yukio, ed To Live and to Write: Selections by Japanese
Women Writers, 1913-1938

Wang, Ping American Visa Minneapolis, Coffee House
Press

White and Barnet, eds Comparing Cultures Boston
St Martin's Press, 1995

MATERIALS NEEDED:

1 One three ring binder which you will use for your journal
and as a collection point for any class hand outs

2 8 1/2" x 11" college ruled loose leaf
notebook paper for your journal

3 One folder with pockets that you will use to turn your
journal in to me

COURSE ASSIGNMENTS:

1. Dialogic journal: You will keep a journal to record
your responses to what you read and to discussions in class about
the readings. Your responses may range from comments about the
language of a piece, the situation, perhaps the characterization,
things that you find paradoxical, amusing, or frustrating. The
idea is for you to discover what you find somehow interesting in
the piece.

A. FORMAT OF JOURNAL

1 All entries for the journals should be labeled with the time
and date

2 Single space entries except for one line between separate
entries 
3 Use 8 1/2" x 11" college-ruled white paper

4 Divide each sheet in half vertically and write only in the
left-hand column, single spacing 
5. Write front and back on each sheet of paper and number the
pages just like a book.

6. Use black ink.

7. Create a table of contents for your journal.

B. CONTENTS OF JOURNAL

Divide your journal with two clearly labeled sections and
create a table of contents for each section.

Section I: This part contains your response to each
class. In it you may continue speculating on class discussions,
or you may want to comment on other aspects of the class that you
observed.

Section II: In this section you write your first
thoughts about the selections that you read. You need to pursue
your thoughts into some depth here. For example, it is not enough
to say only that you do not understand a piece. If that is the
case, you need to go into detail using passages of the text to
explain what it is that you are having trouble with. Not
understanding is very typical when we read something for the
first time. Part of our job as readers is to construct the
meanings, and the journal is the first place where you are
encouraged to do this.

C. JOURNAL GROUPS

You will be in groups of three or four individuals, and you
will read and comment on each other's entries. Your responses to
the journal entries are an important part of the journal
experience in this class, and you will learn to provide each
other with thoughtful and thought-provoking commentary.

Each reader will sign or initial the comments made. (The
comments are located on the right sided columns in the journals.)

Scores for the journals are assigned on the basis of criteria
that you will decide. Other classes have usually developed a list
of criteria that addressed length, completeness, and originality
of expression in the journals. Half of each journal score will be
based on your journal production and half on your responding to
other journals. Be prepared to discuss the journal criteria at
the next class meeting.

2. Panel Presentation: For a classroom presentation you
may go together with one or two (at most) other people. You will
be considered "experts" on the text under discussion
and will 
conduct and monitor all classroom discussions of the text you
are presenting. You will field classroom questions and before the
presentation perform simple out of class research on the author
or on any perplexing textual issues that might crop up. You also
will outline any historical or social background that may be
helpful in reading the text for appreciation and understanding.

Your presentation can include but not be limited to the
following materials or activities:

a. A written summary and discussion of one scholarly article
about the work that includes a complete bibliographic reference
to the article being used.

b. Hand_outs (typed and spelled correctly) which will enhance
or direct classroom discussion. Such a hand-out could include a
list of study questions, a catalog of page numbers where certain
scenes or images occur, an outline of the main points of the
work, or social, political, or historical facts that form a
contextual background for the work.

c. Directions for an activity related to the work that would
involve the whole class. Check with me for individual suggestions
for various texts.

On the day of the presentation turn in a one page double
spaced typed narrative describing the activities you or the group
in preparing this presentation.

3. Annotated bibliography: This assignment asks that you do a
modest amount of out-of-class reading about the literature of
China or Japan. You can focus your bibliography on any aspect of
those literatures that you want to, including authors and periods
not mentioned in our class readings.

The final document will be a ten item bibliography using MLA
format. Each bib. item will have a brief paragraph that decribes
the article's main point and contents. Xerox the article and
attach it to the bibliography.

4. Class participation: You are expected to come to class
prepared and ready to discuss the text that has been assigned for
that day. Your journal should be prepared ahead of time so that
it is ready to share with members of your journal group.

COURSE EVALUATION

This course offers you the option to select the grade that you
want to aim for in the following fashion: v
For a "C" you must complete a journal with a minimum
of a "C" score and attend class regularly.

For a "B" you must complete a journal with a minimum
of a "B" score, do a presentation, and attend class
regularly.

For an "A" you must complete a journal with a
minimum of a "B+" score, do a presentation, develop an
annotated bibliography, and attend class regularly.

The journal grade is based on the following scale:

A = 100-92% v 
B = 91-80% 
C = 79-65% 
D = 64-55% 
F = 0-54%

NOTE: YOUR ASSIGNMENTS MUST BE TURNED IN ON TIME AND WILL NOT
BE ACCEPTED LATE WITHOUT A MEDICAL EXCUSE

ATTENDANCE POLICY

If you miss more than three classes throughout the semester
for ANY reason, your final grade will be lowered 1/2 letter grade
for each additional absence. 
BIBLIOGRAPHY TO SUPPORT

DEPARTMENT OF ENGLISH CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT

IN ASIAN LITERATURE

JAPAN

GENERAL BACKGROUND AND CRITICISM

Bowring, R Mori Ogai and the Modernization of Japanese
Culture 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1979

Brandon, James R Chushingura: Studies in Kabuki and the
Puppet 
Theater Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press, 1982

Brower, Robert H and Earl Miner Japanese Court Poetry 
Stanford Stanford University Press, 1961

Ernst, Earle The Kabuki Theater Honolulu University of 
Hawaii Press, 1974

Field, Norma The Splendor of Longing in "The Tale of
Genli" 
Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1987

Hare, T B Zeami's Style: The No Plays of Zeami Motokiyo

Stanford Stanford University Press, 1986

Hibbett, Howard The Floating World in Japanese Fiction New

York: Oxford University Press, 1959

Kamens, Edward Approaches to Teaching Muraski Shikibu's The

Tale of Genji New York MLA, 1993

Karatani Kojin Origins of Modern Japanese Literature Durham

Duke University Press, 1993

Kato Shuichi A History of Japanese Literature 3 vols
Tokyo 
Kodansha International, 1983 
Keene, Donald Landscapes and Portraits: Appreciations of

Japanese Culture Tokyo: Kodansha International, 1971

________ The Pleasures of Japanese Literature New York 
Columbia University Press, 1988 
________ Seeds in the Heart: Japanese Literature form
Earliest 
Times to the Late Sixteenth Century New York: Holt,
1993

________ Travelers of A Hundred Ages New York: Holt,
1989

________ World Within Walls Japanese Literature of the 
Pre-Modern Era, 1600_1867. New York: Holt, 1976 

Knapp, Bettina Liebowitz Images of Japanese Women: A
Westerner's View Troy: Whitston Publishing Co., 1992

Komparu, K The Noh Theatre Principles and Perspectives
Tokyo: Tokyo University Press, 1983

Konishi Jin'ichi A History of Japanese Literature The
Archaic and Ancient Ages Princeton: Princeton University
Press, 1984

________ A History of Japanese Literature: The Early &
Middle Ages Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1986

La Fleur, William R The Karma of Words Buddhism and the
Literary Arts in Medieval Japan Berkeley: University of
California Press, 1983

Lee, Peter Celebration of Continuity: Themes in Classic
East Asian Poetry Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1979

Levy, Ian Hideao Hitomaro and the Birth of Japanese
Lyricism Princeton, NJ : Princeton University Press, 1984

Marcus, Marvin Paragons of the Ordinary: The Biographical
Literature of Mori Ogai Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press,
1993

Miner, Earl Japanese Linked Poetry An Account with
Translations of Renga and Haiku Sequences Princeton:
Princeton University Press, 1979

________ Japanese Poetic Diaries Berkeley: University
of California Press, 1969

Miner, Earl, Hiroko Odagiri, and Robert Morell The
Princeton Companion to Japanese Classical Literature
Princeton, N J : Princeton University Press, 1986

Miyoshi M Accomplices of Silence the Modern Japanese Novel Berkeley
University of California Press, 1974

Murase Miyeko Tales of Japan: Scrolls and Prints from the
New York Public Library Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1986

Pekarol Andrew, ed. Ukifune: Love in the Tale of Genji
New York Columbia University Press, 1982

Pollack D Fracture of Meaning: Japan's Synthesis of China
from the Eighth throuqh the Eighteeenth Centuries Princeton:
Princeton University Press, 19860

Puette William J Guide to the Tale of Genji Rutland:
Tuttle, 
1983

Rimer, J Thomas Modern Japanese Fiction and Its Traditions Princeton:
Princeton University Press, 1978

Schalow, Paul and Janet Walker, eds The Woman's Hand Bibiliography
of Writing By and About Japanese Women (in Press)

Shirane Haruo The Bridge of Dreams: A Poetics of "The
Tale of Genii " Stanford: Stanford University Press,
1987

Singer, Kurt Mirror, Sword, and Jewel: The Geometry of
Japanese Life Tokyo: Kodansha International, 1981

Tsunoda Ryusaku, Wm Theodore de Bary, and Donald Kenne Sources
of Japanese Tradition New York: Columbia University Press,
1958

Ueda Makoto Literary and Art Theories in Japan
Cleveland: Case Western Reserve University Press, 1967

________ Modern Japanese Writers and the Nature of
Literature Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1976

Walker, Janet The Japanese Novel of the Meiji Period and
the Ideal of Individualism Princeton: Princeton University
Press, 1979

Webb, Herschel Research in Japanese Sources A Guide Ann
Arbor: University of Michigan Center for Japanese Studies, 1994

Yamanouchi H The Search for Authenticity in Modern Japanese
Literature Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1978

ANTHOLOGIES

Anderson, G L , ed Masterpieces of the Orient New York
Norton, 1977

Birnbaum, Phyllis, trans Rabbits, Crabs, etc : Stories by
Japanese Women Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press, 1982

Keene, Donald, ed Anthology of Japanese Literature From
the Earliest Era to the Mid_Nineteenth Century New York:
Grove Press, 1955

_______, ed Modern Japanese Literature New York: Grove
Press, 1956 
Lippit, Noriko Mizuta and Kyoro Iriye Selden, trans and eds Japanese
Women Writers Twentieth Century Short Fiction New York: M E
Sharpe, 1991

McCullough, Helen Classical Japanese Prose: An Anthology Stanford
Stanford University Press, 1990

Morris, Ivan Modern Japanese Stories__An Anthology
Tokyo: Tuttle, 1962

Sato Hiroaki and Burton Watson, trans From the Country of
Eiqht Islands: An Anthology of Japanese Poetry Garden City, N
Y : Columbia University Press, 1986

Shiffert, E and Y Sawa, eds Anthology of Modern Japanese
Poetry Tokyo: Tuttle, 1972

Takaya, Ted T , ed and trans Modern Japanese Drama: An
Anthology New York: Columbia University Press, 1979

Tanaka Yukiko and Elizabeth Hanson, eds This Kind of Woman
Ten Stories by Japanese Women Writers, 1960_1976 Stanford:
Stanford University Press, 1982.

_______, ed To Live and To Write: Selections by Japanese
Women Writers, 1913_1938 Seattle: Seal Press, 1987

_______, ed Unmapped Territories: New Women's Fiction From
Japan Seattle: Women in Translation, 1991

Tansman, Alan The Writings of Koda Aya, A Japanese Literary
Dauqhter New Haven: Yale University Press, 1993

Ury, M , trans Tales of Times Now Past Sixty_two Stories
from a Medieval Japanese Collection Berkeley: University of
California Press, 1979

PRE-HEIAN (Before 794 A.D.) LITERATURE

Cranston, Edwin A A Waka Anthology: Vol 1 The
Gem-Glistening Cup. Stanford Stanford University Press, 1993

Doe, Paula A Warbler's Song in the Dusk: The Life and Work
of Otomo Yakamochi Berkeley: University of California Press,
1982

Levy, Ian Hideo Hitomaro and the Birth of Japanese Lyricism
Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1984

The Manyoshu The Nippon Gakujutsu Shinkokai Translation
New York Columbia University Press, 1965 (New edition by
Cranston) 
Miller, Roy Andrew, trans "The Footprints of the
Buddha" An Eighth_Century Old Japanese Poetic
Sequence New Haven American Oriental Society, 1975

Philippi, Donald L , trans Koliki Tokyo Tokyo
University Press, 1968

Rodd, Laurel Rasplica, trans -kinshu Princeton:
Princeton University Press, 1984

HEIAN LITERATURE 794-1185

Bowring, R Murasaki Shikibu Her Diary and Poetic Memoirs Princeton:
Princeton University Press, 1982

Bower, Robert H and Earl Miner, Japanese Court Poetry Stanford
Stanford University Press, 1961

Field, N The Splendor of Longing in the Tale of Genji 
Princeton Princeton University Press, 1987

Harris, P T , trans The Poetic Memoirs of Lady Daibu Stanford
Stanford University Press, 1980

Harris, E G , trans The Tales of Ise Tokyo Tuttle
Press, 1972

McCullough, Helen Craig Brocade by Niqht: "Kokin
Wakashu" and the Court Style in Japanese Classical Poetry
Stanford Stanford University Press, 1985

________, trans Kokin Wakashu: The First Imperial
Anthology of Japanese Poetry Stanford Stanford University
Press, 1985 

________ and W H McCullough, trans A Tale of Flowerinq
Fortunes (Eiga Monogatari) Stanford: Stanford University
Press, 1979

________ Tales of Ise: Lyrical Episodes from Tenth-Century

Japan Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1968 

Miner, Earl Japanese Poetic Diaries Berkeley University
of California Press, 1969

Morris, Ivan, trans As I Crossed a Bridge of Dreams:
Recollections of a Woman in 11th Century Japan New York Dial
Press, 1971

______, trans The Pillow Book of Sei Shonaqon New York
Columbia University Press, 1967 
______, trans The Tale of Genji Scroll Tokyo:
International, 1971

Murasaki Shikibu The Tale of Genji Trans Edward
Seidensticker New York: Knopf, 1976

Seidensticker, E G , trans The Gossamer Years: the Diary of
a Noblewoman of Heian Japan (Kaqero Nikki) Tokyo: Tuttle
Press, 1964

MEDIEVAL LITERATURE, 1185-1603

Brazell, K , trans The Confessions of Lady Nilo New
York Doubleday Anchor, 1973

Carter, Steven D Waitinq for the Wind: Thirty-six Poets of
Japan's Late Medieval Age New York: Columbia University
Press, 1989

Chomei Kamo no The Ten Foot Square Hut Trans A L Sadler
Tokyo Tuttle, 1971

Harries, Phillip T , trans The Poetic Memoirs of Lady Daibu
Stanford Stanford University Press, 1970

Keene, Donald, ed Twenty Plays of the No Theater New
York Columbia University Press, 1970

Keene, Donald, trans Essays in Idleness, the Tzurezurequsa of Kenko
New York Columbia University Press, 1967

Kitagawa Hiroshi and Bruce Tsuchida, trans The Tale of the
Heike Tokyo: Tokyo University Press/ 1975

McCullough, Helen, trans Yoshitsune--A Fifteenth Century
Chronicle. Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1971 

Tyler, Royall, ed and trans Japanese No Dramas New
York: Penguin Books, 1992

Ury, Marion, trans. Tales of Times Past: Sixty-two Stories
from a Medieval Japanese Collection Berkeley: University
of California Press, 1979

Zeami On the Art of the No Drama The Malor Treatises of
Zeami Trans J Thomas Rimer Princeton: Princeton University
Press, 1984

TOKUGAWA (Edo Period) LITERATURE, 1603_1868 
Brandon, James R , trans Kabuki: Five Classic Plays
Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press, 1992

Chikamatsu, Monzaemon Major Plays of Chikamatsu Trans
Donald Keene Tokyo: Kodansha International, 1961

Chushingura. Trans. Donald Keene New York: Columbia
University Press, 1971

Kobayashi, Issa Issa: Cup_of_Tea Poems: Selected Haiku of
KobaYashi Issa 1763_1827 Trans David G Lanoue Berkley: Asian
Humanities Press, 1991

Matsuo Basho The Narrow Road to the Deep North and Other
Travel Sketches Trans Nobuyuki Yuasa London Penguin, 1966

Saikadu Ihara Five Women Who Loved Love Trans William
Theodore deBary. Rutland: Tuttle, 1956.

_______ The Life of an Amorous Woman and Other Writings Trans
Ivan Morris New York: New Directions, 1963

_______ Some Final Words of Advice Trans Peter Nosco
Rutland Tuttle, 1980

Ueda Akinari Ugetsu Monogatari: Tales of Moonlight and Rain
Trans Leon Zolbrod. Vancouver: University of British Columbia
Press, 1974

EARLY MODERN LITERATURE, 1868_1926

Akutagawa Ryunosuke Japanese Short Stories Trans
Takashi Kojima. New York: Liveright, 1961

________ Kappa Trans Seiichi Shiojiri Osaka: Akitaya,
1947

Danly, Robert Lyons In the Shade of Spring Leaves: The Life of

Higuchi Ichiyo, A Woman of Letters in Meiji Japan New 
Haven Yale University Press, 1981

Hori Tatsuo Wind Has Risen

Koda, Rohan Pagoda, Skull, and Samurai 3 Stories Trans
Chieko Irie Mulhern Rutland: Tuttle, 1985

Miayamoto Yuriko Nobuko Tokyo Kaizosha, 1928

Mori Ogai The Incident at Sakai and Other Stories Ed by
David Dilworth and J Thomas Rmer Honolulu: University of Hawaii
Press, 1977 
________ The Wild Geese Trans Kingo Ochiai and Sanford
Goldstein Rutland Tuttle Co, 1959 

Natsume Soseki Kokoro Trans Edwin McClellan Chicago: H
Regnery, 1967

________ Mon Trans F Mathy London: Owen, 1967

Shiga Naoya A Dark Night's Passing Trans Edwin
McClellan Tokyo: Kodansha International, 1976

CONTEMPORARY LITERATURE, 1926

Abe Kobo The Woman in the Dunes 1964 Trans E
DaleSaunders New York Vintage Books, 1991

Ariyoshi Sawako The Doctor's Wife Trans Wakako Hironaka
and 
Ann Kostant Tokyo: Kodansha International Press, 1978

_______ Kabuki Dancer A Novel of the Woman Who Founded
Kabuki 1972 Trans James R Brandon Honolulu Unversity of
Hawaii Press, 1992

_______ The River Ki Trans Mildred Tahara Tokyo:
Kodansha, 1980

Dazai Osamu Crackling Mountain and Other Stories Trans
James O'Brien Tokyo Tuttle Company, 1989

_______ The Setting Sun Trans Donald Keene New York:
New Directions, 1968

Enchi Fumiko Masks Trans Juliet Winters Carpenter New
York Knopf, 1983

_______ The Waiting Years Trans John Bester Tokyo:
Kodamsa International, 1971

Futabatei Shimei. An Adopted Husband Trans Buchachiro
Mitsue 
and Gregg Sinclair New York Greenwood Press, 1969

Ibuse Masuji Black Rain Trans John Bester Tokyo:
Kodansha International Press, 1969

________ Lieutenant Look East and Other Stories Trans
John Bester Tokyo: Kodansha International, 1971

________ Waves Two Short Novels Trans David Aylward and
Anthony Liman Tokyo Kodensha International Press, 1986

Kawabata Yaunari Snow Country Trans Edward
Seidensticker New York: Knopf, 1970 
Matsubara Hisako. Cranes at Dusk Trans. Leila
Vennewitz. Garden City Dial Press, 1984.

Mishima Yukio. Death In Midsummer and Other Stories
Trans. Seidensticker New York: Knopf, 1966

_________ _The Sailor Who Fell From Grace With the Sea
1963. Trans. John Nathan New York: Vintage International 1994 .

________ _The Temple of the Golden Pavillion Trans.
Ivan Morris New York: Knopf 1956
A
Mukoda Kuniko. The Name of the Flower Trans. Tomone
Matsumoto Berkley: Stone Bridge Press, 1993

Nobukc Albery. The House of Kanze: A Saga of Fourteenth
Century Japan New York: Simon and Schuster, 1986.

Ota Yoko. City of Corpses in Hiroshima: Three Witnesses,
ed. Richard Minear. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1990.

Seidensticker, E. trans Kafu the_Scribbler, the Life and
Writings of Nagai Kafu, 1879_1959. Stanford: Stanford
University Press, 1965.

Tanizaki Junichiro. Diary of a Mad Old Man Trans. H.
Hibbett New York: Knopf, 1965.

_______. The Makioka Sisters Trans. E Seidensticker New
York: Knopf, 1957.

_______. Some Prefer Nettles Trans E Seidensticker New
York: Knopf, 1955.

Uno Chiyo. Confessions of_Love Trans. Phyllis Birnbaurr
Honolulu University of Hawaii Press, 1989.



[About]
[Index]
[Search]
[Other Links]
[Comments/Submissions]


ASDP Curriculum Online Project
<
ASDP@lama.kcc.Hawaii.Edu> 



