

Foreign Policy Analysis






Foreign Policy Analysis
GINT 717                                           Jerel A. Rosati
Fall 1992                                          Gambrell 313
 FOREIGN POLICY ANALYSIS
 I have given great thought to the development of this course.  Please read the syllabus carefully for it provides all the basic information about the course.
PURPOSE AND GOALS
 The purpose of the course is to provide you with a strong foundation in the study of foreign policy.  The emphasis of the course is conceptual--focusing on interdisciplinary theories of human behavior and interaction applied to the study of foreign policy.  In other words, the goal is to better understand the practice of foreign policy through the use of theory.  The specific goals of the course to be accomplished are to have you:
 1) acquire an overview of the evolution of the study of foreign policy and the foreign policy literature,
 2) learn different theoretical approaches in order to analyze, synthesize, and understand foreign policy phenomena,
 3) increase your ability to develop a major theoretical and empirical research paper, and

 4) develop your oral and written communication skills as well as to strengthen your ability to reason.
 You will be exposed to different bodies of thought throughout the social sciences, to different foreign policy phenomena of different countries throughout time and space, and to different methodological (and epistemological) approaches.  Given its breadth, the course should not only improve your ability to understand foreign policy, but should also improve your general learning potential and level of professional competence.
 The goals and strategy represent a demanding task and high expectations.  My hope is that you will find the material interesting, that you will learn, and that you will grow as a scholar and intellectual.  The prerequisite to accomplishing all this is "time and effort" on your part.
REQUIREMENTS 
 1.  Direct Participation (30%).  Every individual will regularly participate and receive a grade based on the quality of their participation.  An initial evaluation will be provided sometime during the semester.
 2.  Foreign Policy Analysis Paper(40% total: 10% for research proposal, 10% for overview, 20% for final paper).  Details about the paper are provided below.
 3.  Final Examination(30%).  The final will consist of essays and will be cumulative, focusing on the general points and major concepts/questions addressed in the readings and in class (where the readings are expected to be explicitly integrated).  A study guide will be provided.
 Late assignments.  If you cannot fulfill a requirement by the due date, as a matter of courtesy I expect that you will contact me (or the GINT office) WITHIN 24 HOURS OF THE DUE DATE and provide a legitimate explanation (e.g., medical illness).  Assignments which are allowed to be completed after the due date will be expected to meet higher standards given the additional time granted.
GRADES
 The grades for all of the above requirements are based on the quality of knowledge, quality of analysis, and effective communication demonstrated--in other words, the breadth and depth of understanding demonstrated.  An A represents "excellent" understanding; a B+ represents "very good" understanding; a B represents "good" understanding.  Grades below B indicate that the level of understanding demonstrated is below the level expected of graduate students.
ABOUT THE INSTRUCTOR 
 Dr. Jerel A. Rosati is an Associate Professor and Director of the Graduate Program in International Studies.  He has been a member of the Department of Government and International Studies at Carolina for ten years.  He teaches courses on American politics, U.S. foreign policy, and world politics.  His research focuses on the theory and practice of U.S. foreign policy.  He is the author The Carter Administration's Quest for Global Community: Beliefs and Their Impact on Behavior and the co-editor of The Power of Human Needs in World Society.  He has recently finished an authored book on The Politics of United States Foreign Policy and is completing a co-edited volume on Foreign Policy Restructuring: How Governments Respond to Change.  He is married and the father of three small children.  He enjoys the family, traveling, sports, music, reading, and contemporary affairs.
 If you have any questions or you want to pursue some topic, please feel free to come see me during my office hours or during the afternoons which is when I am most available.
TEACHING PHILOSOPHY AND STRATEGY
 The class will be structured around what I call a class dialogue in which information, knowledge, and thought will be generated through lecture/background, discussion, and, in particular, the Socratic method.  I will often play the role of provocateur and advocate so as to stimulate participation.  The class dialogue emphasizes the importance of student participation and "active learning" as a means to improve one's interest, information, knowledge, and skills.
 The class is organized around the required readings.  I expect every student to come to class prepared for I will regularly call on you to discuss the required readings.  Therefore, every student should be able to summarize and analyze each assigned reading by addressing the following questions:
 1.  What is the author's purpose?
 2.  What is the basic theme(s) or argument(s) of the reading?
 3.  What is the theoretical explanation?  Based on what bodies of                knowledge (and philosophical assumptions)?
 4.  What evidence is provided?
 5.  How does this reading relate to the other readings and to the                central themes of the course?
 6.  What is its overall explanatory power?  Explain its strengths and
         weaknesses and specify the relevant foreign policy phenomena.
 Every student also must prepare a one-to-two page, single-spaced, type written summary of each required reading for the week (a short paragraph for an article; a longer paragraph for a book).  This is to be accompanied by a list of at least 3 or 4 questions raised by the readings--each in a short paragraph presenting the question and explaining why it is being raised.  Summary-question assignments are due by noon Wednesday, the day before class.
REQUIRED BOOKS
 Graham T. Allison, Essence of Decision: Explaining the Cuban Missile Crisis (Boston: Little, Brown, 1971)
 Doris Kearns, Lyndon Johnson and the American Dream (New York: Signet, 1976), available at Universal Copies
 Jerel A. Rosati, The Carter Administration's Quest for Global Community: Beliefs and Their Impact on Behavior (Columbia, S.C.: University of South Carolina Press, 1987)
 John Dower, War Without Mercy: Race and Power in the Pacific War (New York: Pantheon, 1987)
 Ralph Miliband, The State in Capitalist Society: The Analysis of the Western System of Power (London: Quartet Books, 1969), available at Universal Copies
 Richard Ned Lebow, Between Peace and War:  The Nature of International Crisis (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1981)
 G. John Ikenberry, Reasons of State: Oil Politics and the Capacities of American Government (Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 1988)
 COURSE THEMES
 The course revolves around four major themes or questions:
 1.  What are the most powerful ways of explaining foreign policy?  Beginning in the 1950s, social scientists attempted to be more systematic in identifying and explaining major patterns of foreign policy in comparison to more traditional historical and policy analyses of foreign policy.  Thus, an effort was made to link theory (explanation) and practice (description) in foreign policy.  No consensus has evolved; instead, there has been a proliferation of competing theories derived from a variety of different disciplines, such as psychology, sociology, political science, economics, and anthropology, that have been adapted and applied to explain foreign policy.  We will examine many of the major theoretical approaches that have developed in the study of foreign policy in order to better explain foreign policy.
 2.  Traditionally, foreign policy has been explained from a rational actor perspective embedded predominantly within the realist and power politics tradition.  To the present day the rational actor model remains the ideal type when it comes to policymaking.  This raises the following questions:  To what extent do political leaders govern foreign policy?  To what extent is foreign policy a function of rationality?  To what extent should the rational actor model be considered an ideal type?  What alternatives are available?
 3.  What foreign policy phenomena is explained?  The social science emphasis during the sixties was on identifying and explaining the key patterns in the foreign policy "decision-making process" and foreign policy "behavior."  But this does not run the full gamut of foreign policy phenomena.  For example, one can speak at least in terms of foreign policy decision-making, foreign policy behavior, foreign policy outcomes, and foreign policy consequences.  These categories can be further broken down into different types or elements.  Therefore, it is important that we be clear as to what type of foreign policy phenomena is to be explained, for different theoretical approaches may be more relevant for certain foreign policy phenomena than others.  This is a topic that has been underexplored in the study of foreign policy.
 4.  When and why does foreign policy change occur?  Throughout much of the sixties and seventies, foreign policy studies by social scientists lacked a dynamic quality.  The emphasis was on explaining the foreign policy of different countries at the same point in time.  Insufficient attention has been given to explaining patterns of continuity and change in foreign policy over time.  Clearly, recent developments and changes throughout the world suggest that much more attention needs to be to the sources of foreign policy change.  This should not only strengthen explanations of foreign policy throughout history but should also provide a stronger foundation for predicting and understanding foreign policy into the future.
 Other themes will also be explored at times.  For example, we will discuss the evolution of the study of foreign policy.  Foreign policy scholarship, once dominated by scholars who took a narrowly defined "scientific" approach, has broadened, become more eclectic and richer--theoretically methodologically.  Together, a focus on the explanatory power of theory (and the rational actor model), the concept of foreign policy, foreign policy change, and other themes will lead to a better understanding of foreign policy whenever it takes place.
 COURSE TOPICS AND READINGS
 *indicates that the reading is required of all Ph.D.-oriented students, but is only recommended for M.A.-oriented students (given the overall reading demands of the course)
1.  Overview and Introduction
2.  Decision-making Theory
 Allison, Essense of Decision, all
 Janis, Groupthink, introduction, chapters 8, 10 & 11
3.  Decision-making Theory II
 Henry L. Mason, "Implementing the Final Solution:  The Ordinary Regulating of the Extraordinary," World Politics 40 (July 1988), pp. 542-569
 Jerel A. Rosati, "Developing a Systematic Decision-Making Framework:  Bureaucratic Politics in Perspective," World Politics 33 (January 1981), pp. 234-252
 Ole R. Holsti, "Crisis Management," in Psychological Dimensions of War (Beverly Hills: Sage, 1990), edited by Betty Glad, p. 116-142
 John R. Oneal, "The Rationality of Decision Making During International Crises," Polity 20 (Summer 1988), pp. 598-622
 *Jonathan Bendor and Thomas H. Hammond, "Rethinking Allison's Models," American Political Science Review 86 (June 1992), pp. 301-322
 Miriam Steiner, "The Search for Order in a Disorderly World:  Worldviews and Prescriptive Decision Paradigms," International Organization (Summer 1983), pp. 373-413
4.  The Role of Personality
 Alexander L. George and Juliette L. George, Woodrow Wilson and Colonel House: A Personality Study (New York: 1956, 1964), pp. v-xiv, xviii-xxii, 3-13, 113-128, 317-322
 E. A. Weinstein, J. W. Anderson, and A. S. Link, "Woodrow Wilson's Political Personality: A Reappraisal," Political Science Quarterly 93 (1978), pp. 585-598
 Juliette L. George and Alexander L. George, "Woodrow Wilson and Colonel House: A Reply to Weinstein, Anderson, and Link," Political Science Quarterly 96 (Winter 1981-82), pp. 641-666
 Lloyd S. Etheredge, "Personality Effects on American Foreign Policy, 1898-1968," American Political Science Review 72 (June 1978), pp. 434-451
 Stanley and Inge Hoffmann, "De Gaulle as Political Artist: The Will to Grandeur," in Decline or Renewal? France Since the 1930s (New York: Viking Press, 1968), edited by Stanley Hoffmann, pp. 202-253
5.  The Role of Personality II
 Kearns, Lyndon Johnson and the American Dream, all

6.  The Role of Perceptions and Beliefs
 Ole R. Holsti, "Cognitive Dynamics and Images of the Enemy," in Image and Reality in World Politics (New York: Columbia University Press, 1967), edited by John C. Farrell and Asa P. Smith, pp. 16-39
 Robert Jervis, "Hypotheses on Misperception," World Politics 20 (1968), pp. 454-479
 Stephen G. Walker, "The Interface Between Beliefs and Behavior: Henry Kissinger's Operational Code and the Vietnam War," Journal of Conflict Resolution 21 (March 1977), pp. 129-168
 Richard K. Betts, "Analysis, War, and Decision: Why Intelligence Failures are Inevitable," World Politics (October 1978), pp. 61-89
 *John D. Steinbruner, The Cybernetic Theory of Decision: New Dimensions of Political Analysis (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1974), preface, introduction, chapters 2-5 and 10
 Jack L. Snyder, "Rationality at the Brink: The Role of Cognitive Processes in Failure of Deterrence," World Politics 30 (April 1978), pp. 344-365
7.  The Role of Perceptions and Beliefs II
 Rosati, The Carter Administrations's Quest for Global Community, all
 Betty Glad and Brian Whitmore, "Jimmy Carter and the Soviet Invasion of Afghanistan: A Psychological Perspective," in Politics and Psychology: Contemporary Psychodynamic Perspectives, edited by Joan Offerman-Zuckerberg (New York: Plenum Press, 1991, pp. 117-142
8.  The Role of Culture
 Dower, Race and Power in the Pacific War, all
 Martin W. Sampson III, "Cultural Influences on Foreign Policy," in New Directions in the Study of Foreign Policy (Boston: Allen & Unwin, 1987), edited by Charles F. Hermann, Charles W. Kegley, Jr., and James N. Rosenau, pp. 384-405
 *Fritz Gaenslan, "Culture and Decision Making in China, Japan, Russia, and the United States," World Politics 39 (October 1986), pp. 78-103
9.  The Role of the State and Society
 Miliband, The State in Capitalist Society, all
 Amos Perlmutter, "The Presidential Political Center and Foreign Policy: A Critique of the Revisionist and Bureaucratic-Political Orientations," World Politics 27 (October 1974), pp. 87-106
 *Peter J. Katzenstein, "Conclusion: Domestic Structures and Strategies of Foreign Economic Policy," International Organization 31 (Autumn 1977), pp. 879-920
10.  The Role of the State and Society II
 James N. Rosenau, "Pre-Theories and Theories of Foreign Policy," in Rosenau, ed., The Scientific Study of Foreign Policy (New York: Nichols, 1979), pp. 115-136, 167-169
 Maurice East, "Size and Foreign Policy Behavior," World Politics (June 1973), pp. 556-576
 Robert D. Duval and William R. Thompson, "Reconsidering The Aggregate Relationship Between Size, Economic Development, and Some Types of Foreign Policy Behavior," American Journal of Political Science 24 (August 1980), pp. 511-525
 Joe D. Hagan, "Domestic Political Regime Changes and Third World Voting Realignments in the United Nations, 1946-84," International Organization 43 (Summer 1989), pp. 505-541
 Michael W. Doyle, "Liberalism and World Politics," American Political Science Review 80 (December 1986), pp. 1151-1169
 *Joe D. Hagan, "Regimes, Political Oppositions, and the Comparative Analysis of Foreign Policy," in Policy," in New Directions in the Study of Foreign Policy (Boston: Allen & Unwin, 1987), edited by Charles F. Hermann, Charles W. Kegley, Jr., and James N. Rosenau, pp. 339-365
 Thomas Risse-Kappen, "Public pinion, Domestic Structure, and Foreign Policy in Liberal Democracies," World Politics 43 (July 1991), pp. 479-512
 *Michael N. Barnett and Jack S. Levy, "Domestic Sources of Alliances and Alignments: The Case of Egypt, 1962-73," International Organization 45 (Summer 1991), pp. 369-395
 Robert C. North and Nazli Choucri, "Population, Technology, Allen & Unwin, 1987), edited by Charles F. Hermann, Charles W. and Resources in the Future International System," Journal of International Affairs 25 (1971), pp. 224-237
11.  Situational Approaches
 Charles F. Hermann, "International Crises as a Situational Variable," in International Politics and Foreign Policy New York: Free Press, 1969), edited by James N. Rosenau, pp. 409-421
 Lebow, Between Peace and War, all
 *Deborah Welch Larson, "Crisis Prevention and the Austrian State Treaty," International Organization 41 (Winter 1987), pp. 27-60
12.  Global Approaches
 David A Lake, "International Economic Structures and American Foreign Economic Policy, 1887-1934," World Politics 35 (July 1983), pp. 517-543
 Morse, Foreign Policy and Interdependence in Gaulist France, preface, pp. 3-50, 96-115, 315-322
 Timothy W. Luke, "Technology and Soviet Foreign Trade:  On the Political Economy of an Underdeveloped Superpower," International Studies Quarterly 29 (September 1979), pp. 327-353
 William Jess Biddle and John D. Stephens, "Dependent Development and Foreign Policy:  The Case of Jamaica," International Studies Quarterly 4 (December 1989), pp. 411-434
13.  The Dynamic Interaction of Internal and External Forces
 Ikenberry, Reasons of State, all
 Jerel A. Rosati, Martin W. Sampson, and Joe D. Hagan, "The Study of Change in Foreign Policy," in Foreign Policy Restructuring: How Governments Respond to Change (Columbia, SC: University of South Carolina Press, forthcoming), edited by Jerel A. Rosati, Joe D. Hagan, and Martin W. Sampson, chapter 1
 *Jerel A. Rosati, "Cycles in Foreign Policy Restructuring: The Politics of Continuity and Change in U.S. Foreign Policy," in Foreign Policy Restructuring: How Governments Respond to Change (Columbia, SC: University of South Carolina Press, forthcoming), edited by Jerel A. Rosati, Joe D. Hagan, and Martin W. Sampson, chapter 12
14.  The Study of Foreign Policy

 James N. Rosenau, "Comparative Foreign Policy: One-time Fad, Realized Fantasy, and Normal Field," in International Events and the Comparative Analysis of Foreign Policy, edited by Charles W. Kegley, Jr., Gregory A. Raymond, Robert M. Rood, and Richard A. Skinner, pp. 3-38
 Steve Smith, "Rosenau's Contribution," Review of International Studies 9 (1983), pp. 137-146
 *Bahgat Korany, "The Take-Off of Third World Studies?  The Case of Foreign Policy," World Politics 35 (April 1983), pp. 465-487
 Charles F. Hermann and Gregory Peacock, "The Evolution and Future of Theoretical Research in the Comparative Study of Foreign Policy," in Hermann, Kegley, and Rosenau, eds., New Directions in the Study of Foreign Policy (Boston: Allen & Unwin, 1987), pp. 13-32
 John A. Vasquez, The Power of Power Politics: A Critique (New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press, 1983), pp. 1-23
 Donald J. Puchala, "Woe to the Orphans of the Scientific Revolution," Journal of International Affairs 44 (Spring/summer 1990), pp. 59-80.
 Hayward R. Alker, Jr. and Thomas J. Biersteker, "The Dialectics of World Order: Notes for a Future Archeologist of International Savoir Faire," International Studies Quarterly 28 (June 1984), pp. 121-142
 Yosef Lapid, "The Third Debate: On the Prospects of International Theory in a Post-Positivist Era," International Studies Quarterly 3 (September 1989), pp. 234-254
 *Thomas J. Biersteker, "Critical Reflections on Post-Positivism in International Relations," International Studies Quarterly 3 (September 1989), pp. 263-267
 *Jim George, "International Relations and the Search for Thinking Space: Another View of the Third Debate," International Studies Quarterly 3 (September 1989), pp. 269-279
 Alexander L. George and Richard Smoke, "Theory for Policy in International Relations," Deterrence in American Foreign Policy: Theory and Practice (New York: Columbia University Press, 1974), pp. 616-642
 FOREIGN POLICY ANALYSIS PAPER
 The purpose of the paper is to improve and demonstrate your ability to engage in foreign policy analysis, as well as improve your written communication skills.  This is to be done by examining the relationship between theory and practice for some facet of foreign policy.  Your paper can be approached from one of two perspectives:

 1.  From the perspective of explaining some foreign policy phenomena that you find of interest.  For example, you may be interested in explaining the development of Kenya's coffee export policy given an interest in Africa and international economics.  You then need to ask yourself what concepts or bodies of theory help to explain it.
 2.  From the perspective of examining to what extent some concept or theory you find of interest explains foreign policy.  For example, you may be interested in the role of individual personality.  You then need to ask yourself what aspect of foreign policy do you want to examine to determine the explanatory power of the role of personality.
 In either case, your paper must review and apply some concept or body of theory to some practice in foreign policy.  You can rely on a particular theoretical approach, compare or integrate a number of different approaches, or develop your own approach.  You can examine a single foreign policy case, compare a few cases, or examine multiple cases (I am even open to the study of non-state foreign policy).  You can examine foreign policy at one place in time or over time.  You can rely on a more traditional historical study or a more statistical and quantitative one.  The choice is yours.  Ultimately, you want to be able to discuss the relationship between theory and practice:  that is, to what extent is the foreign policy phenomena you choose to examine explained by your theory?  what is the explanatory power of your theory?  what other theories are relevant?
 Use the required readings for possible ideas and as possible models to emulate in your paper.  There is no exact format-instead, there are different ways to conduct and present theoretical-empirical research (although articles in World Politics are often treated as ideal types).  I have also provided a list of recommended journals and books below in order to assist you in formulating, researching, and developing your paper.
 Your paper should be well-written and well-organized--in other words, clear and concise.  It should have an introductory section and a concluding section.  The theory, method, and empirical analysis of foreign policy should be clearly laid out.  The dominant themes should be explicit and highlighted throughout the paper.  It should look professional.  REMEMBER: this type of paper is not easy to construct or develop.  THINK about what you are going to say and how you are going to say it.  THE BURDEN IS ON YOU to be as clear and understandable as possible.
 The paper will consist of three stages:
 I.a RESEARCH PROPOSAL is due Monday, September 28.  Provide 2-3 pages of text, double-spaced that addresses:  1) what you plan to do--what concepts and theory, what foreign policy phenomena, what is the expected relationship; 2) why you plan to do it--why should the reader find this of theoretical or practical interest; and 3) how do you plan to proceed--how are you going to analyze the relationship between theory and practice, what method, what sources of evidence.  The 2-3 pages of text should be accompanied by a 1 page, single-spaced, tentative outline of how the paper will be organized and a 1-2 page, single-spaced bibliography of the works that appear to be most significant for developing your paper (for both theory and practice).
 II. an OVERVIEW is due Monday, November 2.  Provide a 3-4 page, double-spaced, summary of the paper (or what you believe will by the final contents of the paper).  This should be accompanied by a separate single-spaced outline detailing the organization and contents of the paper and a separate extended single-spaced bibliography--each entry annotated in 1-3 sentences--of the most significant sources drawn upon within the paper.
 III. the FINAL PAPER is due Monday, December 7.  20-25 pages of text, typewritten, double-spaced with footnotes.  Use a note style that is commonly accepted by international relations journals (such as International Studies Quarterly or World Politics).
 I expect high quality in the contents, presentation, and readability for all three stages in the process.  Proposals and summaries below the grade of B will be asked to be redone until they reach a satisfactory level.  The quality of your proposal is most important, for most finished papers usually are only as good as the original proposal.  Feel free to see me about your proposal and paper.
 RECOMMENDED JOURNALS
 These journals tend to have articles which emphasize the role of theory in understanding the practice of foreign policy:
Alternatives
Comparative Politics
Cooperation and Conflict (Scandanavian)
International Interactions
International Journal (Canadian)
International Organization
International Social Science Journal
International Studies Quarterly
Jerusalem Journal of International Relations (Israeli)
Journal of Conflict Resolution
Journal of International Affairs
Journal of Peace Research (Nordic)
Millenium: Journal of International Studies (British)
Political Psychology
Political Science Quarterly
Review of International Studies (British)
Sage International Yearbook of Foreign Policy Studies
World Politics
 RECOMMENDED BOOKS
 These books tend to provide an overview of particular theoretical perspectives and often apply them to explain the practice of foreign policy.
 Joseph H. deRivera, The Psychological Dimension of Foreign Policy (Charles E. Merrill, 1968)
 Alexander L. George, Presidential Decisionmaking in Foreign Policy: The Effective Use of Information and Advice (Westview Press, 1980)
 Morton H. Halperin, Bureaucratic Politics and Foreign Policy (Brookings, 1974)
 G. John Ikenberry, editor, American Foreign Policy: Theoretical Essays (Scott, Foresman, 1989)
 Paul Kennedy, The Rise and Fall of the Great Powers: Economic Change and Military Conflict from 1500 to 2000 (Random House, 1987)
 C. Wright Mills, The Power Elite (Oxford University Press, 1956)
 Ronald Inglehart, The Silent Revolution: Changing Values and Political Styles Among Western Publics (Princeton University Press, 1977)
 Robert Jervis, Perception and Misperception in International Politics (Princeton University Press, 1976)
 David M. Ricci, The Tragedy of Political Science: Politics, Scholarship, and Democracy (Yale University Press, 1984)
 Leon V. Sigal, Fighting to a Finish: The Politics of War Termination in The United States and Japan, 1945 (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1988)
 Philip Darby, Three Faces of Imperialism: British and American Approaches to Asia, and Africa, 1870-1976 (New Haven, Co.: Yale University Press, 1987)

 Jack Snyder, The Ideology of the Offensive: Military Decision Making and the Disasters of 1914 (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1988 
 Evangelista, Innovation and the Arms Race: How the United States and the Soviet Union Develop New Military Technologies (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1988)
 Charles F. Hermann, Charles W. Kegley, and James N. Rosenau, editors, New Directions in the Study of Foreign Policy (Boston: Allen & Unwin, 1987)
 Alexander L. George and Juliette L. George, Woodrow Wilson and Colonel House: A Personality Study (New York: Dover, 1956)
 Maurice A. East, Stephen A. Salmore and Charles F. Hermann, editors Why Nations Act: Theoretical Perspectives for Comparative Foreign Policy (Beverly Hills: Sage, 1978)
 Irving L. Janis and Leon Mann, Decision Making: A Psychological Analysis of Conflict, Choice, and Commitment (New York: Free Press, 1977)
 Margaret G. Hermann, editor, Political Psychology (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1986)
 James N. Rosenau, The Scientific Study of Foreign Policy (New York: Free Press, 1979
 Richard Herrmann, Perceptions and Behavior in Soviet Foreign Policy (Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press, 1985)
 Deborah Welch Larson, Origins of Containment: A Psychological Explanation (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1985)
 John Steinbruner, The Cybernetic Theory of Decision (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1974)
 Robert A. Axelrod, editor, Structure of Decision: The Cognitive Maps of Political Elites (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1976)
 Richard Snyder, H. W. Bruck, and Burton Sapin, editors Foreign Policy Decision-Making (New York: Free Press, 1962)
 Lloyd S. Etheredge, Can Governments Learn: American Foreign Policy and Central American Revolutions (New York: Pergamon Press, 1985)
 Robert O. Keohane and Joseph S. Nye, Power and Interdependence: World Politics in Transition (Boston: Little, Brown, 1989)
 Patrick J. McGowan and Howard B. Shapiro, The Comparative Study of Foreign Policy: A Survey of Scientific Findings (Beverly Hills: Sage, 1973)
 Harvey Starr, Henry Kissinger: Perception of International Politics (Lexington, KY: University Pres of Kentucky, 1984)
 Daniel Heradstveit, The Arab-Israeli Conflict: Psychological Obstacles to Peace (Oslo: Universities forlaget, 1979)
 Stephen D. Krasner, Defending the National Interest: Raw Material Investments and U.S. Foreign Policy (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1878)
 Robert Gilpin, War and Change in World Politics (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1981)
 Tony Smith, The Patterns of Imperialism: The United States, Great Britain and the Late-Industrializing World Since 1815 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1981)
 Jacqueline Anne Braveboy-Wagner, The Caribbean in World Affairs: The Foreign Policies of the English-Speaking States (Boulder, Co.: Westview Press, 1989)
 Alexander L. George, Deterrence in American Foreign Policy: Theory and Practice (New York: Columbia University Press, 1974)
 Davis B. Bobrow, Steve Chan, and John A. Kringen, Understanding Foreign Policy Decisions: The Chinese Case (New York: Free Press, 1979)

 Richard Cottam, Foreign Policy Motivation: A General Theory and a Case Study (Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press, 1977)
 John R. Oneal, Foreign Policy Making in Times of Crisis (Columbus, OH: Ohio State University Press, 1982)
 Betty Glad, editor, Psychological Dimensions of War (Beverly Hills: Sage, 1990)
 George W. Breslauer and Philip E. Tetlock, editors, Learning in U.S. and Soviet Foreign Policy (Boulder, Co: Westview Press, 1991)
 Joel S. Migdal, Strong Societies and Weak States: State-Society Relations and State Capabilities in the Third World (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1988. 

You may  download text copies of each of these syllabi. 





