


Science and Society in 20th Century America - Syllabus



Science and Society in 20th Century America
HPSS*S571, Fall 2000 -- MW 11:20 to 12:50, CB 431
The Rhode Island School of Design, Providence RI
Roger B. Blumberg -- 
Syllabus
http://www.cs.brown.edu/~rbb/risd/S571.syllabus.html

See also the S571 Reference Page


Briefly:
This course examines and raises questions about 
the roles and representations of scientific 
knowledge and practice 
in the political/social/cultural history of the past century.
During the semester, we will focus on two significant "projects" with
natural science at their core: The Manhattan Project, which aimed at
and succeeded in producing a "practical military weapon" in the form
of an atomic bomb; and, The Human Genome Project, the aims of which
include the identification of all the 100,000 genes in human DNA,
the determination of the sequences of the 3 billion chemical base 
pairs that make up human DNA, the development of technologies
to analyze and store this information. In examining these Projects, 
we'll be interested in understanding not only
the science that facilitate(d) 
these activities, but the relationships between individuals 
and institutions, between science, history and politics, that 
constituted these activities as well. We'll be especially interested in 
thinking and learning about these relationships by examining
diverse representations of scientific theory and practice
in contemporary literatures and arts. 
Attention will also be paid to considering 
the moral and political responsibility of the educated layman as 
well as the scientific expert, and the way different theories
of social and political responsibility are inscribed in 
representations of scientific theory and practice.


Requirements:: The basis for our discussions in this course
will be readings, and related writing assignments. Students 
are expected to read 
critically a variety of texts (philosophical, sociological and
scientific) and to contribute to class discussions. In addition
to short assignments, students will, before the Thanksgiving
holiday, complete a 8-10 page essay that analyzes one or 
several representations 
of either nuclear or biological
science (the representation may be drawn from the arts or the 
sciences), and there will be 
a final exam.


Why This Course?: College and university courses dealing 
with science generally fall into rather distinct and exclusive 
disciplinary categories.
Science departments offer courses in the knowledge and techniques 
that ground and facilitate scientific practice, or at least the
education and training of scientific professionals of various 
sorts. History departments offer courses about the history of
ancient and 
modern science, and most often these aim to survey a period of
several hundred years and present the achievements of science
in the context of an investigation of "Great Experiments" or
"Great Men/Women" or the classic texts of science. Philosophy 
departments offer 
courses in the philosophy of science, which generally 
analyze scientific language and 
what (if anything) is signified by the use of the 
term "scientific" (e.g. in the phrases "scientific knowledge", 
"scientific explanation", etc.). But as the HPSS department at RISD
is not
especially concerned with training scientists, philosophers, 
or historians, we're free to ask whether/how these different 
approaches refer to the same enterprise or set of activities 
in using the word "science", and what that enterprise and/or
set of activities is all about. Our emphasis will be on the 
interpretation of  different 
representations of science and scientific knowledge, and the
relations between them, without worrying about disciplinary
allegiance, and we'll
use these comparisons and contrasts to arrive (I hope)
at both
a broader and deeper understanding 
of the complex relations between
science and society.


Books
Required Texts: (available in paperback editions
at the RISD Bookstore)

Latour, Bruno. We Have Never Been Modern (Harvard University Press, 1993).
Catelon, Philip L. et al (eds.) The American Atom: A Documentary
History of Nuclear Policies from the Discovery of Fission to the Present, 2nd edition (University of Pennsylvania Press, 1991, 1984)
Hales, Peter Bacon. Atomic Spaces: Living on the Manhattan Project (University of Illinois Press, 1997)
Selden, Steven. Inheriting Shame: The Story of Eugenics and Racism
in America (Teachers College Press, 1999)
Lewontin, Richard. Biology as Ideology: The Doctrine of DNA
(Harperperennial Library, 1993)
Kevles, Daniel and Leroy Hood. The Code of Codes: Scientific and
Social Issues in the Human Genome Project (Harvard University Press,
1992)


Recommended Texts: (available in paperback editions
at the RISD Bookstore)

Rhodes, Richard. The Making of the Atomic Bomb (Touchstone Books, reprint edition, 1995).
Judson, Horace Freeland. The Eighth Day of Creation (Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, expanded edition, 1996)


These and additional books and articles will eventually
be on reserve at the RISD library. Our web site will 
include additional readings
and reference material.

Weekly Schedule

Week #1 (September 13): Introduction to the course
From Snow's "The Two Cultures" to the Sokal Hoax, the 
relationship between social and scientific studies in the US
has always been a matter of some controversy. We'll discuss
different views of this relationship in the last half of the 
20th century, and establish a context for this course, as
well as the study of science in higher education.

Assignment:Sketch or otherwise represent your current
views about the relationship between science and society,
either in diagramatic. pictorial, or expository form. 
This assignment is due in class on the 25th.


Week #2 (September 18 & 20): Science and/in/for/against 
Society
Bruno Latour's We Have Never Been Modern and 
competing answers to the question "What is Science?" A brief
look at the origins and representations of modern science,
and the consequences of this history for our received 
notions of the role of science in contemporary life.

Required Reading: Latour, chapters 1-2.


Week #3 (September 25 & 27): The discovery of nuclear 
fission, 1897-1939
We'll review the physics and technology that led to the discovery
of fission, as well as the mechanism of fission itself.
We'll
look at the discoveries, calculations and experiments, with
attention to the  characteristics of scientific knowledge
as well as the assumptions implicit in the way that knowledge is 
inscribed and communicated. 

Required Reading: Cantelon, et al., pp. 1-20.


Week #4 (October 2 & 4): The Manhattan Project I:
The first self-sustaining nuclear chain reaction + the 
formation of the Manhattan Engineer District = the origins 
of the Manhattan Project. The choices of Oakridge, Los Alamos, 
and Hanford, and the interplay between the scientific and
the social in the early 1940s.

Required Reading: Hales, chapters 1-4.


Week #5 (October 9 & 11): The Manhattan Project II
The science of daily life on the Manhattan Project, and
questions about the relationship between historical and
scientific representations of the process of science.

Required Reading: Hales, chapters 6-10.


Week #6 (October 16 & 18): The Manhattan Project III
July 16, 1945 (5:29 a.m.) and questions about understanding and
representing "Trinity", "The Bomb", "the New World", etc. 
Reflections on/of Latour.

Required Reading: Catelon, et al, pp. 21-67; Hales, 
chapter 11.


Week #7 (October 23 & 25): Transition to Genetics
Where was biology during the discovery of nuclear fission? A
brief history and science of genetics and the discovery of DNA, 
1865 - 1953. Two views of the background to the HGP.

Required Reading: Selden, chapters 1-3.
Assignment: Essay topic proposal due.


Week #8 (October 30 & November 1): The Human Genome Project I
The historical politics and/or political history of genetics.
Tracing Eugenics in the US and thinking about the place of 
genetic concepts in contemporary social theories and thoughts.


Required Reading: Selden, chs. 4 and 7.; Kevles and Hood, ch. 2.


Week #9 (November 6 & 8): The Human Genome Project II
What is the Human Genome Project (really), and how does it 
blend scientific, technological and social efforts? Views from
the scientific community and questions about how ethical issues
are inscribed in and/or described by science.


Required Reading: Kevles and Hood, chs. 3-7.


Week #10 (November 13 & 15): The Human Genome Project III

Current developments in the HGP, 
and continuing questions of scientific and social
responsibility as the Project yields "results". Looking at 
both professional and popular representations of the HGP and
reflecting on how best to represent Latour's "networks".


Required Reading: Kevles and Hood, chs. 9 and 11.


Week #11 (November 20):  The Faces of Contemporary Genetics
The latest issue of Nature Genetics carries a lead 
editorial about the recent decision, in the UK, to allow the 
Association of British Insurers (ABI) to use the results of a 
genetic test for Huntington's Disease to determine whether or
not to grant applicants life insurance policies in excess of 
100,000 pounds. The second editorial summarizes an article in
the journal concerning the reconstruction of the path(s) of 
human evolution using molecular techniques to analyze the Y
chromosome. We'll discuss these editorials, the events they
report, and their significance as representations of contemporary
genetics. 

In-class reading Nature Genetics, November 2000,
selected editorials.


Week #12 (November 27 & 29): Science and Society Revisited
We'll return to concerns raised by Latour's first and second 
chapters, and examine his remarks in chapters 3 and 4 in light
of our studies of the Manhattan Project and the HGP. We'll
begin with Latour's comment (p. 87): "For each state of 
Society there exists a corresponding state of Nature."


Recommended Reading: Latour, chs. 3 and 4
Essays must be turned in no later than Wednesday the 29th, in class.


Week #13 (December 4 &: 6): Situating Science and 
Society (again)
We'll spend this week preparing for the final exam, with 
discussions inspired by students' essays.

December 11th: Final Exam

Contact information

My office at RISD is 206 Carr House, and my scheduled office hour
is Monday 10-11 a.m. and Wednesday from 6-7 p.m. I am most easily 
reached by e-mail (rbb@brown.edu) or at my office at Brown 
(502 CIT, 863-7619), and I am happy to 
schedule additional office hours if requested.



© 2000 Roger B. Blumberg



