







INTRODUCTION TO MEASUREMENT AND STATISTICS 

(Fall 2002)

Course:  PSYC 2750: Introduction to Measurement and Statistics - (SCI, MTH)
Instructor:  Dr. Linda M. Woolf
Office Hours:Monday, Wednesday, and Friday
 1:00 - 2:00 p.m., or by appointment, 301 Webster Hall Phone: 968-6970 or 968-7062 woolflm@webster.eduWoolf Web Page: http://www.webster.edu/~woolflm/

Text:  McCall, R. B. (2000) Fundamental Statistics for Behavioral Sciences, (8th Ed.). New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.
Course Description:

Introduction to Measurement and Statistics (PSYC 2750) is for the university student who wishes to gain an understanding of basic statistical concepts.  Knowledge of these concepts is essential for the reading of technical journals in one's field and basic research design.  In other words, no matter whether you are sitting by the fireplace catching up on your reading about depression or working on a new treatment method, knowing when 
and how to use measurements and statistics is fundamental.  The basic concepts to be covered are: the contrast between descriptive and 
causal research types of measurement the use of descriptive statistics to summarize research resultsthe use of inferential statistics 
to draw conclusions based on a sample(s) drawn from a population.  No prior statistical knowledge is required for this class.  Classroom techniques that will be used to achieve the course objectives will include
 lecture, active problem solving sessions, homework, and examinations.


This course is coded for the Scientific Understanding goal in the General
 Education program.  Scientific Understanding is defined as the analysis 
of the concepts of a scientific discipline and its methods, limitations, 
and impact in the modern world.  

This course is also coded for the Mathematics goal in the General Education program.  Mathematics is defined as the recognition of the value and beauty of mathematics as well as the ability to appraise and use quantitative data.
Course Objectives:
To develop a practicing and theoretical understanding of descriptive and inferential statistics.
To develop an understanding of how to choose a statistic or determine
 if the one used is appropriate based on the type or source of quantitative data. 
To develop an appreciation for the use of statistics and an ability to recognize the misuse of statistics.  In other words, to make the student an active consumer of statistics (i.e. do people really lie with statistics?). 
Course Outcomes:
The student will have an understanding of basic research methodology and the impact of research design on data interpretation.
The student will be able to differentiate between a descriptive and inferential statistic and will know when each is being interpreted appropriately.
The student will know how to represent and interpret frequency and statistical data using basic graphing techniques.
The student will know how to compute and evaluate measures of central
 tendency, measures of variability, standard scores, correlation coefficients, linear regression, standard error, confidence intervals,  t-tests (independent and correlated), and one/two factor ANOVA.
The student will know when to appropriately use and how to interpret data from each of the above statistical techniques.
The student will understand the underlying assumptions and theory of 
hypothesis testing.
NOTE:  Statistics can be fun or at least they don't need to be feared.  The logical and mathematical concepts required to do well in this class are not prohibitive for any health science or university student.  The key to doing well in this class can be summarized by two words, "KEEP UP!".  If you don't understand a concept in class, ask.  
I'm more than willing to re-explain.  If you start to fall behind, contact me as soon as possible.  We'll make some arrangements.  This is important because the material discussed four weeks from today will be based on 
material discussed today.  For more survival tips, see Survival Tips
Incoming Competencies/Prerequisites:
Prerequisite: PSYC 1030 or permission of the instructor.  All students should be capable of basic math and simple algebra.
Class Meetings:

The class will meet on Monday, Wednesday, and Friday from 12:00 - 12:50. 
 Attendance is strongly recommended as this material is difficult and 
conceptually complex.  Classroom attendance will greatly enhance your understanding of the information.

Course Requirements:

A midterm exam, a final exam, and homework assignments.

All grades will be assigned on a scale of 0 - 100 with:

90 - 100A,A-Superior work
80 -  89B+,B,B-Good work
 70 -  79C+,C,C- Satisfactory work
 60 -  69D+,D Passing, but less than Satisfactory
 Less than 60F Unsatisfactory

Percent of Grade:

Midterm Exam 40%
Final Exam 40%
Homework 20%

Examination format will include short answer and problem solving.  The midterm will be take-home.  The final will be in-class.  The final will be 
open-book and open-note.  Each exam will constitute 40% of your final grade.  All exams must be taken on the date scheduled except in case of emergency.  In case of the above, the instructor must be notified.  No make-up exams will be provided if you fail to notify and discuss your situation
 with the instructor.  Please note that no extra credit work will be made
 available to make-up for a poor test grade.

Homework will be assigned for the material covered during lecture.  This 
will provide you with the opportunity to review and reinforce the material covered in class.  It also serves as a diagnostic tool for me to see where people might be having problems.  No late assignments will be accepted except in cases of emergency.  Homework will constitute 20% of your final grade.  Note: Not turning in homework assignments can result in a one to two letter grade drop in your final grade.

Plagiarism (attempting to pass of the work of another as one's own is not
 acceptable and will result in a grade of 0 for that assignment and will 
be turned over to the appropriate university source for disciplinary action.  In addition, cheating on exams will also result in the same fate.




Late withdraws from this class will not be approved by the instructor except in cases of emergency discussed with the instructor.  No late withdraws will be approved on the basis of poor class performance.   

This syllabus is subject to change at the instructor's discretion.  All changes concerning course requirements will be provided in writing.  Changes concerning exam dates may be made at the instructor's discretion and communicated verbally to the class.

It is understood that remaining in this course (not dropping or withdrawing from this course) constitutes an agreement to abide by the terms outlined in this syllabus and an acceptance of the requirements outlined in this document.    No grade of Incomplete will be issued for this course. 

   COURSE OUTLINE
Week Ending Topic                             Reading
August23 Introduction to classIntroduction to statisticsOverview of methodologyChapter 1Chapter 12Introduction to Measurement and Statistics
Research Methods
August30Frequency
 Distributions and Graphing                                            Chapter 2
 September6Frequency
 Distributions and Graphing                                    Chapter 2
 September13Characteristics-distributions                                Chapter 3
 September20Characteristics-distributions Measures of relative standing  Chapter 3 Chapter 5
September27     Correlation   Chapter 7
 October4 Regression   Take home Midterm Exam  Chapter 6
 October11 Sampling distributions Midterm Due  Chapter 8
Fall Break
 October25  Hypothesis testing  Chapter 9
November1  Hypothesis testing: t-tests                          Chapters 10 -11 
 November8  Hypothesis testing: t-tests                                   Chapter 10 - 11  
 November15  Simple ANOVA Chapter 14
 November22 Simple ANOVA  Chapter 14
 November29Factorial ANOVAChapter 15
 December6Factorial ANOVAChapter 15
 December11FINAL EXAM (10:30 - 12:30) (Double-check on posted exam schedule as this time is an approximate)  


Back to Statistics Page

