

Siena College - Political Science Department




Political Science
Department

 

Program Description
Program Requirements (Major, Minor, Certificates)
Faculty Members (Information about the members of the
    Political Science Department at Siena: Office location and phone number, office hours,
    direct e-mail access, HOME PAGES of some members, SYLLABI for some courses)
Course Offerings (Organized by sub-field)
Internship Opportunities
    (Washington Semester Program, Legislative Process, Public Service Studies)
Washington
    Semester Program. Please contact Prof. Leon Halpert
    (518/783-2373) for information about this program. 
Careers for Political Science Majors
WEB RESOURCES:On-line
    library catalogs, Political Science professional organizations, Political Science
    departments, Web resources organized by political science sub-field)
Membership in
    ICPSR 
Pi Gamma Mu: International
    Social Science Honorary
Current Issues in America Syllabus

Program Description
The Political Science curriculum provides students with a comprehensive
understanding and appreciation of the study of politics. Students will obtain basic
knowledge within and across the principal fields of the discipline; think critically about
the enduring issues of politics while studying political institutions, processes, behavior
and value systems; and develop a variety of research skills.
Students who major in Political Science or who complete substantial coursework in
the department will have a foundation for future careers or graduate study in such areas
as law, government service, public policy and administration, international affairs,
teaching, journalism and community or private sector service. Internships, independent
study projects, and honors courses provide students with in-depth learning opportunities.
The program also serves as a basis for knowledgeable and concerned citizenship for those
who choose not to concentrate in political science.
Program Requirements
Requirements for the Major: 36 hours in Political
Science, including POSC-100 through POSC-180.
Requirements for the Minor: 2 courses at the
introductory level from POSC-100 through POSC-180; 4 courses at the elective level from
POSC-205, through POSC-378. A student may substitute one Political Science internship
(POSC-470, POSC-485 or POSC-489 for one course at the elective level. A student choosing
the Washington Semester may substitute POSC-790 through POSC-797 for up to two courses at
the elective level.
Education Certification: Political Science majors
seeking provisional certification in social studies need 30 hours in Political Science,
including POSC-100 through POSC-180. Also required are: 3 hours in Economics, 3 hours in
Sociology and 21 hours in History. The History requirement must include the 3 hour College
core requirement and the 21 hours must be distributed across four areas: 6 hours in
European history (includes HIST-101 or HIST-190) of which at least 3 must be in
pre-nineteenth century European history; HIST-203 and HIST-204; 6 hours in non-Western
history; and 3 hours in HIST-327 New York State History.  Students must take 6 hours
of college level language other than English.  To be considered for the Education
program, students must have an overall GPA of 2.90, with a 3.00 in Political Science.
Faculty Members
Here is where you find information about the members of our department. 

Leonard Cutler, Ph.D.
Kate Langdon Forhan, Ph.D.
Leon Halpert, Ph.D. 
Matthew Lindstrom, Ph.D.
Salvatore Lombardo, Ph.D. 
Euclid Rose, Ph.D.
Jean Stern, Ph.D.

Course Offerings

Core Courses 
American Politics 
Comparative Politics 
International Relations 
Internships 
Political Theory 
Public Administration and Public Policy 
Public Law 

Web Resources
This section contains World Wide Web links to: 

On-Line Library Catalogs 
Colleges
    and Universities 
On-line Newspapers and
    Magazines 

 






This page is maintained by: Jean Stern
    This page last updated on: Thursday, September 06, 2001






