



American Government--POLS 101--Syllabus




American Government
POLS 101 -- Spring 2001
Dr. Evan McKenzie

General Information
Course Number:  Lecture--87547
Time:  M,W,F 11:00-11:50 am  
Room:  Learning Center D1
Instructor:   Evan McKenzie
Contact Information:   I am located in BSB 1122-D.  My office
direct line is 312-413-3782.   My internet address is mckenzie@uic.edu.  My office hours
are MW 12-1pm and by appointment.
Required Readings
These materials have been ordered through the UIC Bookstore:

Thomas R. Dye and Harmon Zeigler, The Irony of Democracy, Millennial Edition (Harcourt Brace, 2000)
	Daniel Hellinger and Dennis R. Judd, The Democratic Facade, Second Edition, (Wadsworth, 1997)
I will also hand out photocopied items for you to read from time to time.
	


Course Description
This course has two objectives.  The first is to help you learn to think about government and politics.  The second is to familiarize you with a body of information about our politics, history, and institutions of government.  Under the first objective, we will try to develop your critical thinking ability.   "Critical" does not mean "negative."   It means your ability to free yourself, temporarily, from your preconceptions and take a new, fresh look at something--a look that is uniquely yours.  

The course has a theme, which is to examine American politics by asking whether or not the nation is governed by an elite, by democratic pluralism, or under some other system.  We will be asking both empirical and normative questions about this nation's politics.  Empirical statements attempt to portray the world as it is.  Normative statements are phrased in terms of what ought to be.  Simply put, empirical statements are about facts, and normative statements are about values.  The distinction between the two kinds of statements is often hard to make in practice, but it is a useful analytical tool, so we will begin by accepting that there is a difference, and learn to question it later.  For example, an empirical statement about democracy might be, "American is (or is not) a democracy."  A normative statement might be, "America should (or should not) be a democracy."  We will be examining questions like this, looking at them from a variety of perspectives, and along the way absorbing a considerable amount of information about the American system of government that should help you answer some of these questions for yourself.
I hope we will have an open and lively class discussion every session, and one which is also respectful of differences of opinion and always civil and polite.   Please be assured that you cannot possibly hurt your grade by disagreeing with what you think I believe, nor can you help it by agreeing!  And I should warn you that I often play 'Devil's Advocate."  That means I will defend positions with which I disagree.  I am most likely to do this if I think the classroom discussion is too one-sided.  Above all, suspend your quick judgements about things, listen to your classmates, read your books, and think about things as if you were encountering them for the first time. 

Course Requirements

Midterm examinations (2 X 12.5% = 25%): Given as set in the course schedule below, these will combine objective and essay format in about a 50/50 format.
	Final examination(20%): Same format as the midterms, given on the day and time set by the University.
	Weekly reaction papers (15%):  Every Monday you will turn in a one-page summary of the readings, concluding with two or three questions or issues that struck you as particularly significant.
	Media Journal (15%)  You will keep a journal with clippings and your comments, tracing issues you consider important.  More about this later, but the idea is for you to get informed, and also to learn to consider the influence of the media on the way issues are framed, the values they promote, the things they include and exclude, and other aspect of a critical perspective on the media.
	Political Film paper (15%):  You will compare and critically evaluate a pair of political films from a list I will provide.  Again, more about this later.
	Participation (10%):  Attendance is mandatory.  I will take roll at the start of every class session.  Anybody missing more than six classes will fail the course.  You are also being evaluated on the quality of your participation, meaning the degree to which you help us have a productive classroom community.  Civility, originality,intelligence, preparation...these are the things to bring to the discussion.


Schedule of Readings and Assignments
Each week is identified by the Monday of that week.  Please note that all reading assignments are to be completed before the first class meeting of the week indicated, except for the first week.  Sometimes we may get behind, but the reading schedule always remains the same.
WEEK:

January 8.  Introduction to the course: 
Begin Unit One: Elite Theory.
 The irony of democracy vs. the democratic facade.  For Wednesday, read Dye and Zeigler (henceforth DZ) through Chapter One; for Friday read Hellinger and Judd (henceforth HJ) through Chapter 1.
January 15. (Monday is a holiday). The founding. Read
Federalist No. 10 (handout); DZ ch. 2.
January 22.    Elites in American
political history.  DZ ch. 3; HJ ch. 2.
January 29.  The structure of elite power.  DZ ch. 4
February 5.  Monday:  First mid term exam. Study Guide is available
on line. Weekly paper due Wednesday.  
Begin Unit Two: Politics.  
 Public opinion.  DZ ch. 5; HJ ch. 4  
February 12.  The media.  DZ ch. 6; HJ ch. 3
February 19.  Parties.  DZ ch. 7; HJ ch. 5
February 26.  Elections.  DZ ch. 8; HJ ch. 6
March 5.  Interest groups.  DZ ch. 9; HJ ch. 7
March 12. Spring Break.  No classes
March 19.  Monday:  Second mid term exam.  Weekly paper due
Wednesday. 
Begin Unit Three:  Government Institutions and Public Policy. 
The executive branch.  DZ ch. 10; HJ ch. 8 
March 26.  The bureaucracy; congress.  DZ. ch. 11 and 12
April 2.   The courts.  DZ ch. 13; HJ ch. 9, 10
April 9.   The states in the federal system.  DZ ch. 14
April 16.  Social movements.  DZ ch. 15
April 23.  Public
policy.  DZ ch. 16; HJ ch. 11
April 30. Final Examination week:  Our exam will be 
on Thursday from 10:30am to 12:30pm in Lecture Center D1.

Miscellaneous
I will update this syllabus from time to time with things that I think you might find interesting or useful.


Internet Links
The Federalist Papers and other historical documents
The Ultimate Political Science Links Page
Back to UIC Political Science Home Page
Back to Evan McKenzie's Home Page



