



Math 155 Way of Thinking Spring 2001

















 Next: About this document ...





Math 155 Way of Thinking

Spring 2001



MWF 1:10pm - 2:00pm

T 1:00pm - 1:50pm 

MC 402







Instructor: Dr. Milan Lukic 

Office: MC 521 

Office Hours: MTWF 10:00-10:50, or by appointment 

Phone: (608) 796-3659 (Office); 787-5464 (Home) 

e-mail: mnlukic@viterbo.edu 

WWW: http://www.viterbo.edu/personalpages/faculty/MLukic







Course Description
(from the catalog)

An investigation of topics including the history of mathematics, number
systems, geometry, logic, probability, and statistics. There is an emphasis
throughout on problem solving. Recommended for General Education.



Text
Robert Blitzer,  Thinking Mathematically, Prentice-Hall, 2000.



Core (General Education) Skill Objectives:

Thinking Skills:

(a)
Students will use reasoned standards in solving problems and
presenting arguments.

Communication Skills: Students will ...

(a)
...read with comprehension and the ability to analyze and evaluate.
(b)
...listen with an open mind and respond with respect.
(c)
...access information and communicate using current technology.



Life Value Skills:

(a)
Students will analyze, evaluate and respond to ethical issues from an
informed personal value system.



Cultural Skills: Students will ...

(a)
...understand culture as an evolving set of world views with diverse
historical roots that provides a framework for guiding, expressing, and
interpreting human behavior.
(b)
...demonstrate knowledge of the signs and symbols of another culture.
(c)
...participate in activity that broadens their customary way of thinking.



Aesthetic Skills:

(a)
Students will develop an aesthetic sensitivity.




Specific Course Goals:
Those happen to coincide with some of the NCTM
(National Council of Teachers of Mathematics) ``standards'' for mathematics
education. We have:


The students shall  ...


...develop an appreciation of mathematics, its history and its
applications.



...become confident in their own ability to do mathematics.



...become mathematical problem solvers.



...learn to communicate mathematical content.



...learn to reason mathematically.





General Education Course Objectives:

Thinking Skills: Students will ...

(a)
...explore writing numbers and performing calculations in
various numeration system.


(b)
...solve simple linear equations.



(c)
...explore the mathematical model of simple and compounded interest
rates, and learn how to use those ideas in solving the problems of loan
payments.



(d)
...explore a few major concepts of Euclidean Geometry, focusing
especially on the axiomatic-deductive nature of this mathematical system.



(e)
...develop an ability to use deductive reasoning, in the context of the
rules of logic and syllogisms.



(f)
...explore the basics of probability.



(g)
...learn descriptive statistics, including making the connection between
probability and normal distribution table.



(h)
...solve a variety of problems throughout the course which will require
the application of several topics addressed during the course.

Communication Skills: Students will ...

(a)
...collect a portfolio during the course and write a reflection paper.
(b)
...do group work (labs and practice exams) throughout the
course, which will involve both written and oral communication.


(c)
...turn in written solutions to occasional problems.



(d)
...write a mathematical autobiography.



(e)
...learn to use the Internet resources and present the findings in
class. The specific project will be to find as many as possible proofs of
the Pythagorean Theorem that are available on the Internet, and then each
student will be responsible to present a different proof to the entire class.





Life Value Skills: Students will ...

(a)
...develop an appreciation for the intellectual honesty of deductive
reasoning.


(b)
...listen with an open mind and respond with respect.



(c)
...understand the need to do one's own work, to honestly challenge
oneself to master the material.



Cultural Skills: Students will ...

(a)
...explore a number of different numeration systems used by other
cultures, such as the early Egyptian and Mayan peoples.
(b)
...develop an appreciation for the work of the Arab and Asian cultures
in developing algebra during the European ``Dark Ages''.


(c)
...explore the contribution of the Greeks, especially in the areas of
Logic and Geometry.





Aesthetic Skills: Students will ...

(a)
...develop an appreciation for the austere intellectual beauty of
deductive reasoning.


(b)
...develop an appreciation for mathematical elegance.




Content:
This course is aimed at the needs of elementary education
majors and as such is the first part of a three-course 12 credit sequence
(MATH 155-255-355). This is a ``content'' course rather than a ``methods''
course (teaching methods are addressed in the latter two courses in the
above sequence). It is what people generally call a ``Liberal Arts
Mathematics Course'', meaning that it covers a wide variety of topics, has
an emphasis on problem solving, and uses a historical and humanistic
approach. Consequently, the course is considered appropriate for the general
education requirements and is open to all students.


We plan to cover, with an appropriate selection, mainly the material from
the first nine chapters of the textbook.



Course Philosophy and Procedure
Two key components of a success in
the course are regular attendance and a fair amount of constant, every-day
study. You should try to make sure that your total study time per week at
least triples the time spent in class. Also, an active class participation,
working in small groups, not hesitating to ask me for help both in class and
in my office can greatly enhance the success and quality of your learning.
You should also use the Learning Center facilities (MC 320) as much as
possible.


Grading will be based on three in-class exams ( points each), a
cumulative final exam ( points), class participation, take-home problems,
projects, group practice exams and portfolios. 


My grading scale is


A=90%, AB=87%, B=80%, BC=77%, C=70%, CD=67%, D=60%.


There will be a few assignments not generally included in a mathematics
 course, but which will, I hope, make your experience in this class more
 well-rounded than in a typical algebra course. These include the following:


 Mathematical Autobiography: Due Tuesday, September 7.  Point value
25. This will be a 3-5 page paper in which you will explore your life as a
math student. Try to be specific, and to reflect what method and styles
worked for you in the classrooms throughout your K-12 career.


 Portfolio: Due Friday, December 10.  Point value: 50. During this
course you will be working many problems, some of which will be
``breakthrough'' efforts, when you finally understood how to do something or
which you are proud of because your write-up was so well done. You will
chose FIVE problems along the way which you want to include in your
portfolio; for each of these problems you will include a nicely organized
re-write of the problem along with a brief reflection paper on why you chose
that particular problem and on what you learned from the problem. Each of
the five problems (the write-up and the reflection paper combined) will be
worth 10 points. I expect at least one page for each problem.


 In-class Presentation: The presentation of a proof of the
Pythagorean Theorem found on the Internet. 


Typically, the explanations you will find on the Internet are a bit sketchy.
So part of your job will be to make sure you really understand the proof you
are going to present (including filling in the gaps, i.e., the reasons not
entirely spelled out in the Internet write-up), and then to clearly explain
that proof to your class mates. Sometimes, some people, may find this part
quite difficult. Of course, I am here to help you understand and overcome
those difficulties, and so please do not hesitate to ask me for help.


You should also be prepared for the questions from the audience (myself
and/or other students), and it is expected that you listen closely to other
presentations and ask any question you might have. 


The presentation will be worth  points. In addition to that, one certain
problem for one of the exams, and for the final exam is going to be:

State and prove the Pythagorean Theorem.



 Group Labs: At a number of points during the course you will be
working on a ``lab'' in small groups. Even though you will be working in a
group of three or four people, each person should turn in a paper. It is
important that each person contributes their input into these labs. However,
I expect you to write the turn-in paper all by yourself.



The Learning Center
provides a number of ways to assist you. In
particular, there are  drop in hours MTWRF 11:00-11:50 and 3:10:4:00. 




I am looking forward to explore this fascinating subject with you, and for
all of us to have an interesting and enjoyable semester.



Americans with Disability Act:
If you are a person with a disability
and require any auxiliary aids, services or other accommodations for this
class, please see me and Wayne Wojciechowski in Murphy Center Room 320
(796-3085) within ten days to discuss your accommodation needs.




This syllabus is tentative and may be adjusted during the semester.






About this document ...









 Next: About this document ...



2001-01-11



