


MATHEMATICS GRADUATE STUDENT HANDBOOK







MATHEMATICS GRADUATE STUDENT HANDBOOK 


This handbook is an attempt to collect in one place all of the
most important information for students in the master's program
in mathematics at Western Washington University. Our hope is that
explaining the academic regulations in some detail would help
to minimize any uncertainty about program requirements or expectations.


TABLE OF CONTENTS


1. Admission Requirements



2. Graduation Requirements

Course Requirements

Grading Policy

Plan of Study

Qualifying Exam

Advancement to Candidacy

Project

Thesis Option

Transfer Credit

Full-time Status

Additional Requirements


3. The Project

Eligibility and Outline of procedures

Objectives

Role of the Supervisor

The Oral Examination

The Colloquium Talk

Grading

 

4. The Thesis

Eligibility and Outline of Procedures

Evaluation of Proposal

The Thesis Adviser

The Thesis Committee

Content and Evaluation of the Thesis

The Final Evaluation

The Public Defense

Award of "Cum Laude"


5. Sources of Financial Support



6. For T.A.'s

Payday

Office, Key, Materials

Missing Your Class

Cheating

Incomplete Grade Contract (K-Grade)

Final Grades

Teaching Evaluations


7. Summary of Procedures for the Master's Degree




1. ADMISSION REQUIREMENTS


To be eligible for full admission to the M.S. program in Mathematics,
a students should have a baccalaureate degree and

1) have completed the following courses or their equivalent with
a grade of "B" or better: Math 224, 304, 312, 331, CS
120, and two courses at the 400 level,

2) have an overall GPA in undergraduate mathematics of at least
3.0, and

3) have taken the General Aptitude Test of the Graduate Record
Examination.

A student whose native language is not English must have passed
the TOEFL Examination within the two year period prior to entering
the graduate program with a score of at least 565.

A student who has completed all of the courses listed under (1)
but who can demonstrate strong promise of the ability to succeed
in the M.S. program in Mathematics may be admitted with special
stipulations. The Graduate Adviser will specify the coursework
necessary to correct the weaknesses in the student's background
and the time period for its completion. In some cases one or more
of these courses may be acceptable as part of the graduate degree
program.

A very limited number of students who undergraduate GPA in mathematics
is below 3.0 may be granted provisional admission. The Graduate
Adviser, will specify the conditions to be satisfied by the student
in order to qualify for full admission. A student on provisional
status may not hold a Teaching Assistantship, but is eligible
for other forms of financial support. See the section "Sources
of Financial Support."

2. GRADUATION REQUIREMENTS


A student may select either a non-thesis program with a project
(48 credits including 2 project credits) or a program with both
the project and a thesis option (45 credits including up to 6
thesis/project credits).

The specific course requirements, the Plan of study, the Qualifying
Exam and other requirements for Advancement to Candidacy are common
to both options, as are the project oral exam and colloquium talk.
Other requirements are as described for the particular option.
Departmental policy limits students to at most 4 credits of seminars,
and limits reading courses to those who have been advanced to
candidacy. At most 4 credits of thesis (Math 690) may be applied
toward the degree. (This is in addition to the 2 credits of Math
691 allowed for the project).


Course Requirements


The following courses or their equivalents must be completed before
graduation:

Math 504, 521, 522,

and one course or its equivalent from each of the following lists:


(1) 502, 503, 560, 564, 566

(2) 523, 525, 527, 528, 539, 562

(3) 535, 542, 545, 570

(4) 510, 511, 573, 575, 577.

The student's program must include at least 4 of the following
courses: Math 503, 511, 523, 525, 527, 528, 533, 539, 545, 560,
562, 564, 566, 570, 573.

The departmental Graduate Committee may add other courses to this
list.

A student who has had an equivalent course as an undergraduate
will not have to take the course as part of the graduate program.
However a student may not receive credit toward a master's degree
at Western for courses which have been used as part of a previous
degree. Note that although in some cases a student may be required
to complete some credits at the 300 level and/or more than 10
credits at the 400 level to make up for deficiencies in preparation
for graduate study, no 300 level credits and at most 10 400 level
credits may be counted towards the credit requirements for the
degree.

Grading Policy


The current grading policy is as follows
(see also "Additional Requirements"): 

I) Over a two-year period, about half of the grades in the graduate
courses should be either A or A-.

ii) The grade B is regarded as satisfactory, but B- is not.

iii) For a dully numbered course, the assignment of grades to
graduate students is (in principle) not related to the assignment
of grades to the undergraduates.

Plan of Study


The "Plan of Study" is an agreement
between the student and the University specifying a list of courses
which, when completed, satisfy the course work requirements of
the degree. The Plan is drawn up by the student in consultation
with the Graduate Adviser and admitted to the Graduate School.



The purpose of the Plan is to formalize each student's expectations,
and protect the student. The Plan should be completed during the
first quarter of study or, if this is not possible by the end
of the first year of the program. It is understood that plans
can change; amendments to the Plan can be made by submitting a
Change of Plan of Study form to the Graduate School.

Qualifying Exam


Each student must pass a Qualifying Exam
before being advanced to candidacy, and therefore before approval
of project topic. The exam covers calculus, elementary linear
algebra, and elementary differential equations and is designed
to allow a student to demonstrate mastery of these subjects at
an early point in graduate study/ 


Failure to complete this requirement in the first year of study
may make it difficult to complete the degree within two years.
The exam is normally given before classes begin in September and
March. A student needing more than three attempts to pass the
exam must have permission of the Graduate Committee to remain
in the program.

Advancement to Candidacy


A student is eligible for advancement to
candidacy after he or she has


1) received full admission to graduate degree status,

2) completed at least 12 credits of graduate course work with
a grade of B or better,

3) filed a Graduate Plan of Study with the Graduate School,

4) passed the Qualifying Exam.

Advancement is granted by the Graduate School upon the recommendation
of the Graduated Adviser. It is the student's responsibility to
initiate the process when the requirements above have been satisfied.


Project


All students must complete the requirements
of the project. Two credits toward the degree will be awarded
upon successful completion of the project which will involve both
an oral examination on the subject of the project and a colloquium
presentation to the mathematical community. See the section entitled
"The Project." 


Thesis Option


A student who elects the thesis option may complete
the degree with 45 credits of which at most 4 are thesis credits
(Math 690). The procedures for selecting a thesis committee, for
submission of the thesis, and for the thesis defense are described
in the section entitled: "The Thesis." The student should
note that the departmental Graduate Committee will not approve
a specific thesis proposal until the student passes the oral exam
for the project, schedules the colloquium, and submits a satisfactory
3-page sample of expository mathematical writing to the graduate
Committee. It is intended that the actual writing of the thesis
will begin after the colloquium has been presented. The intended
time of graduation should be two quarters (excluding summer) after
the oral examination. For example, to graduate in June, the student
would have to pass the oral examination by Fall quarter, and would
have started work on the project the previous June. The Committee
reserves the right to decide that a student cannot select the
thesis option if it feels that he or she is not suitable prepared.



Transfer Credit


At most nine quarter hours of transfer
credit can be included in the program. These credits must be submitted
for approval to the Graduate Adviser. If accepted by the Graduate
Adviser and the Graduate Dean, they will be included in the student's
Plan of Study. To be acceptable as transfer credit, courses must
be of a level equivalent to that of Western courses acceptable
in the graduate program, must not have been used as part of the
requirements for any previous degree, and must have been completed
within five years of the expected date of graduation.



Full-Time Status


For purposes internal to the Graduate School,
a student is considered to be full-time if registered for at least
8 credits. In particular, a Teaching Assistant must register for
at least 8 credits each quarter.


To receive money through the Financial Aid Office, a graduate
student must be registered for at least 109 credits. This applies
to certain tuition waivers and also to graduate work-study money.


Additional Requirements


In addition to the requirements above, the Graduate
School has a number of requirements concerning residency, time
limits, grades and so forth. These are summarized here. See the
Graduate section of the General Catalog for additional details.



1) Residence

A student must be registered for at least 2 credits during the
quarter of his of her graduation, or during the quarter before
graduation.

2) Time Limit

The degree program must be completed within five years.

3) Grades

A student must maintain a GPA of at least 3.0 to remain a candidate
for a graduate degree. Courses taken Pass/Fail may not be applied
toward a graduate degree. A student who receives more than 10
credits of "C" or lower grades is removed from the program.
Every "C" received, including those from courses repeated
later, counts toward the total.

3. THE PROJECT


Eligibility and Outline of Procedures


A student may begin formal work on a project
after being advanced to candidacy. The project will involve independent
study under the direction of a supervisor, an oral examination,
and a colloquium presentation to the department.


The first step is selection, with the aid of the Graduate Adviser
as necessary, of a project supervisor. No student shall be denied
the opportunity to have a supervisor. The subject matter of the
project shall be chosen by the student and the supervisor together.
After obtaining the supervisor's approval the student shall submit
to the graduate Committee a typed proposal, approximately
one page long, setting out the topic to be studied and a list
of references. This must be done by the end of the second quarter
before the quarter in which the student plans to graduate except
by permission of the Graduate Committee. (For example, a student
planning to graduate in June would have to submit the proposal
during fall Quarter.) This proposal may be accepted (possibly
subject to revisions) or rejected by the Graduate Committee. If
accepted, the Graduate Committee will select a project committee;
the student must consult the Chair of the Graduate Committee to
select a date for the oral exam. This date must occur prior to
the quarter in which the student graduates.

After a successful oral exam, the student will give a public presentation
of the project work. This must be completed before final certification
to the Graduate school that the student has completed all degree
requirements under the non-thesis option.

Objectives


The purpose is to establish that the student
is able to engage in independent study of advanced mathematical
material and to present the results of such study in a scientific
and scholarly manner. In order to meet this purpose the material
concerned should lie beyond the scope of courses normally taught
at WWU, but may for example be based on topics covered in advanced
texts or published papers appearing in journals.


Role of the Supervisor


It is the task of the supervisor to guide
and assist the student where necessary, beginning with preparation
of proposal for submission to the Graduate Committee. The supervisor
should meet regularly with the student to monitor the progress
of the work, and should provide appropriate criticism of both
the work and the oral presentations. In particular, the supervisor
should hear preliminary versions of the colloquium talk and offer
constructive suggestions for its improvement.


The Oral Examination


A one-page handout must be prepared by the
student and supervisor, and distributed by the latter at least
two days before the oral exam. The handout should include date,
time, and place, and names of the project committee members. 



The student will give a 15-20 minute summary of the material studied
during the project to an audience of faculty members only, and
will be expected to answer questions designed to reveal whether
a satisfactory understanding of the material and background has
been achieved.

The Graduate Committee will meet immediately after the oral exam
and will decide whether the student's performance is satisfactory.
If so, the student may schedule the colloquium talk. If not, the
student may repeat the oral exam once. If a second attempt is
also unsuccessful, the student will be required to leave the graduate
program.

The Colloquium Talk


After the oral examination has been passed,
the final step is a one hour colloquium talk by the student on
his or her topic. 


In collaboration with the supervisor, the student must prepare
a title and abstract for the talk, and give this to the Colloquium
Organizer one week before the talk.

The talk should be at a level suitable for graduate students in
the department and should:

1) demonstrate a good understanding of the subject matter and
familiarity with its broader mathematical context, 

2) be of a sufficiently high mathematical level, and

3) be clear coherent, well organized, and interesting.

The talk should be thoroughly prepared and practiced to fit within
the time available. It should include a brief introduction
describing the problem, its history and significance, and outlining
the content of the talk. Appropriate examples and applications
should be included. The student is not expected to cover
everything that he or she has learned during the project.

No talk presented in a class such as a 599 seminar class may simultaneously
serve as the colloquium talk, although the topic of the project
may be related to a talk given in such a class.

Grading


The project will be graded satisfactory
(S) or unsatisfactory (U).


4. THE THESIS


Eligibility and Outline of Procedures


A student may begin formal work related
to the thesis option after being advanced to candidacy. It is
his or her responsibility to find a faculty member willing to
serve as adviser for the project and thesis and their joint responsibility
to develop a thesis/project proposal for submission to the Graduate
Committee. The proposal should be accompanied by a three-page
sample of mathematical expository writing that conforms to the
norms of the mathematical literature. If the Graduate Committee
approves the thesis/project proposal and is satisfied with the
writing sample, and schedules a date for the oral exam, this action
is still only a tentative approval of the thesis option. Approval
for a thesis option will be given only after the student has passed
the oral exam and scheduled the colloquium. After passing the
oral exam and giving a satisfactory colloquium, the student may
elect at any time not to select the thesis option. If the proposal
is accepted, the student should find two other faculty members
willing to serve with the thesis adviser on the thesis committee.
The thesis topic and thesis committee membership must then be
submitted for the Graduate Dean's formal approval on a "Statement
of Problem" card, available at the Graduate Office or the
Math Office. It is expected that a student would normally spend
at least nine months (possibly including a summer) working on
the thesis.


Evaluation of Proposal


The Graduate Committee will evaluate the
thesis proposal according to the following criteria:


1) mathematical maturity and level of preparedness of the student,


2) potential of the student to complete the proposed project,


3) suitability and significance of the topic.

If the Committee feels that the student is not ready or suitable
for the thesis option, then further course work could be prescribed
for the thesis option might be declined altogether.



The Thesis Adviser 


It is the student's responsibility to find a faculty member willing
to serve as an adviser and their joint responsibility to develop
a proposal for submission to the Graduate Committee. Once this
is accepted, the adviser is responsible for guiding the student,
reading drafts, deciding on the suitability of subject matter,
and monitoring progress. The advisor will also examine the written
thesis in conjunction with the thesis committee and take part
in the Final Evaluation. It is the responsibility of the thesis
adviser to keep the thesis committee informed of the student's
progress and of any possible difficulties.

The adviser must be available for regular consultation at WWU
throughout the envisaged period of study. The adviser and other
members of the thesis committee normal will normally be on the
list of graduate faculty.

The Thesis Committee


The thesis committee will consist of
the adviser and at least two other faculty members. They are expected
to read and evaluate the thesis and to participate in the Final
Evaluation. they are also expected to monitor the student's progress
about halfway through the period of study for the intermediate
progress report. Regular contact with the student during the course
of study is encouraged.


Content and Evaluation of the Thesis


The student is expected to demonstrate in
the thesis knowledge of the field within which the thesis topic
lies, the relevant literature, and the context of his or her work.
This thesis must constitute a contribution to mathematical knowledge
and understanding either by means of a critical review, comparison,
unification of material or by some (original) mathematical advance.
In all of the above the contribution must be of a substantial
nature and both the oral and written presentations must be done
in a scholarly manner.


A coherent written draft of the thesis will be required by the
thesis committee before the eighth week of the quarter before
the quarter in which the student expects to graduate.

A final draft of the thesis must be available to the thesis committee
and any other interested faculty at least two weeks before the
Final evaluation. If the thesis committee feels that the thesis
requires more than minor typographical corrections, the Final
Evaluation must be postponed until the committee is satisfied.
In practice, the adviser is expected not to permit submission
of a final draft until he or she feels that it will be considered
acceptable. If, after at least two "final" versions
have been examined, the committee feels it appropriate to inform
the student that the thesis project has been unsuccessful they
may do so and the student will be required to drop the thesis
option. The format of the thesis must conform to the norms of
the mathematical literature and to the regulations of the Graduate
School. A copy of the Graduate School regulations is available
from the Department Office.

The Final Evaluation


The Final Evaluation is made by the thesis
committee (including the thesis adviser). This meeting is not
open to the student, but the members of the graduate committee
are invited to attend. It must take place not later than the fourth
week of the quarter in which the student plans to graduate and
must be scheduled at least two weeks in advance.


The thesis committee will meet immediately after the Final Evaluation
to make a decision regarding its acceptability. If the thesis
is judged not acceptable, the student will be allowed one further
Final Evaluation.

The Public Defense


After the thesis has been accepted by
the Final Evaluation, the final step is a one hour Public Defense
by the student. the student should first spend 40 minutes giving
an overview of his or her work. There will then be a question
session in which the adviser and other members of the thesis committee
asks questions specifically related to the thesis and to the more
general field within which it lies. Some of these questions may
be posed ahead of time so that the student can prepare in advance.
Once the adviser and thesis committee have completed their questions,
other faculty and the Graduate Council representative will be
given an opportunity to put questions to the candidate.


The Graduate Office must be informed at least two weeks before
the Public Defense in order to allow for the presence of a representative
of the Graduate Council.

Award of "Cum Laude"


If the Graduate Committee, upon the recommendation
of the thesis committee, feels that the thesis work and course
work is of a particularly high quality, they may declare that
the master's degree is awarded Cum Laude. This is purely a departmental
award which can be referred to on the student's vitae and in letters
of recommendation.


5. SOURCES OF FINANCIAL SUPPORT


The three principal sources of financial
support through the Graduate School are teaching assistantships,
the graduate work-study program, and partial tuition and fee waivers.



Teaching Assistantships


A student interested in receiving a Teaching Assistantship
should apply at the same time as applying for admission to the
graduate program. Note that a separate form is required. The duties
of a T.A. generally involve the teaching of one section of an
elementary mathematics course each quarter under the supervision
of a faculty member. A student must be fully admitted to the graduate
program in order to be eligible for a T.A.


A student may receive support as a T.A. for at most six quarters.
Once a student has received a full Teaching Assistantship, it
will generally be renewed for as long as necessary (within the
six quarter limitation) provided he or she continues to make adequate
progress toward the degree and is a successful teacher. 

Graduate Work-Study Program*


Graduate work-study money is available through
the Financial Aid office on the basis of financial need to graduate
students not holding a Teaching Assistantship. Provisionally admitted
students are eligible for this money provided they qualify on
the basis of need. Students are eligible to work for at most 19
hours per week at a rate which is comparable to that of a T.A.
Duties consist generally of assistance with the instructional
program of the department in a manner determined by the student's
experience and by the number of hours per week allowed.


Partial Tuition and Fee Waivers*


A limited number of partial tuition waivers
of $375/quarter are available through the Graduate Office upon
the recommendation of the Mathematics Department to residents
of the state of Washington who are not Teaching Assistants.


*It is necessary to be registered for at least 10 credits in any
quarter in which a tuition waiver or work-study money is received.
Credits such as P.E. activity courses are acceptable.

Available Sources


1) For the past several years four or five graduate
students have been hired as instructors during Summer quarter
to teach one course each. Preference is given to experienced T.A.'s
who have about a year of work remaining for the master's degree.
Demonstrated teaching ability is a prime consideration in selecting
these instructors. This position does not count toward the six
quarter limit on T.A.'s.


2) Whatcom Community College occasionally hires second-year graduate
students to teach a course.

3) Private tutoring.

6. For T.A.'s


Payday

The first payday is usually October 10th. However
you cannot be paid until you fill out a W-4 and an I-9 form. Please
fill out these forms as soon as you can and give them to a secretary
in BH 202. Along with the form you will need to present one or
more identifying documents.


Office, Key, Materials


The Graduate Secretary will assign you a desk
in an office and will provide you with an office key. If you
lose your key you will have to pay for a replacement, which
will probably take at least a week to get. Please put your name
on a large sheet of paper and tape it to your desk. Computer terminals
are available in BH 229, 231, 233 and 244. They are for the use
of T.A.'s only--no exceptions. Offices are for the use of T.A.'s
only--not other students or friends.


You will need to choose 5 hours per week for office hours and
post these outside your office. T.A.'s often choose common office
hours (which are always noisy) in order to keep the office a quiet
and usable study room at other times. ALWAYS be there for each
full office hour.

Office supplies (pencils, red pens for grading, etc.) are in BH
202. The copy card for the copy machine is in BH 200. You may
not use the departmental copy card for personal use, but you can
purchase a personal copy card at Wilson Library Copy Center. For
copying materials for every member of your class, you must use
the services of Copy Duplicating; your lead instructor must make
the copy duplicating request (unless you are teaching Math 99).
You have a mailbox in BH 211. check it daily as this is where
notices, many of which have time deadlines, will be deposited.


Your Class


You will be teaching one section of a course in
which there is a lead instructor. The lead instructor will be
responsible for the exams (though you may be asked to help compose
them) and the grading scheme. The T.A.'s will do much of the grading.
The lead instructor will assist you with materials to be taught,
assist you in limiting the time you spend on all teaching duties
to not more than 20 hours in any one week, determine the class
syllabus, and will also meet with you regularly to discuss how
and when to cover the material. You are expected to attend these
sessions, to work cooperatively with the lead instructor and your
peers, to assist in paper grading, to prepare well for each class
you teach, and to start each class on time. All class handouts
must be approved in advance by the lead instructor. The lead instructor
is there to help you become a better teacher. (Remember that all
of us always have room for improvement.)


The following statement concerning the relationship between teachers
and students pertains to all teaching levels and is worth thinking
about.

"I've come to the frightening conclusion that I am the decisive
element in the classroom. My personal approach creates the climate.
My daily mood makes the weather. As a teacher, I possess a tremendous
power to make a child's life miserable or joyous. I can be a tool
of torture or an instrument of inspiration. I can humiliate or
humor, hurt or heal. In all situations, it is my response that
decides whether a crisis will be escalated or de-escalated and
a child humanized or de-humanized." - Haim Ginott.

If a student in your class wants a special favor--some variation
in the announced grading scheme or the privilege of taking a quiz
or exam at other than the announced time, getting an "incomplete,"
or changing the grading scale for instance--refer the student
to the lead instructor. Avoid ingratiating yourself with your
class by complaining about the lead instructor to them. Always
remember that while acting as a T.A. you are a colleague and we
expect you to behave like one.

Missing Your Class


If you ever have to miss a class for health
or other reasons (it goes without saying that "other"
reasons should be equally compelling) get another T.A. or faculty
member to substitute for you and always report each absence to
the lead instructor and to the Graduate Adviser. We have the general
policy of helping each other as needed, so we don't pay substitutes,
but rather hope that it all balances out overall.


Cheating


It is an unfortunate fact that you may have
to cope with cheating in your class. You should try to avoid it
by careful proctoring of exams and other mechanisms that you may
discuss with your lead instructor. Sometimes suspected cheating
may be squelched before it has any effect without making any formal
accusation. Just take away the extra notes, make students who
seem to be collaborating move to different seats or whatever is
appropriate.


If you suspect (or know of) cheating after an exam, do not
attempt to deal with the situation yourself. At no time should
you publicly accuse a student of cheating. Among other things,
doing so exposes you to the legal danger of libel and slander.
Take such cases to your lead instructor and the Graduate Adviser
to deal with. There is a very well developed university policy
on cheating which you should read; a student found cheating received
an F for the course and is placed on a list in the office of the
Vice President for Academic Affairs.

Incomplete Grade Contract (K-Grade)


Incomplete grade contracts must be completed
with the lead instructor of Graduate Advisor. Refer such requests
to the appropriate person. 


Final Grades


At the end of each quarter you have
taught, be sure the Graduate Secretary has a copy of your final
grade sheet, a copy of your record for each test score for every
student and a copy of the syllabus (or whatever you have showing
grade cut-offs). Since students may request a grade change after
you have left WWU.


Teaching Evaluations


You are required to have student evaluations
of EACH YOU CLASS YOU TEACH. Each quarter, a form will appear
in your mailbox with must be filled in and sent to the
Testing Center to request a package of evaluation forms for your
class. Failure to comply with the procedure detailed in this
package may result in cancellation of your assistantship.


General Expectations


No use of alcohol or drugs will be allowed
during working hours. If there is any incident where we believe
the use of alcohol or drugs affected your T.A. duties, you will
be required to have an evaluation within one week of the incident,
and to follow the recommendations that result from the alcohol
or drug evaluation. Use of abusive language or behavior, either
with your students, your peers, or your instructors, is not acceptable.
Sexual harassment (defined in the university catalog) is unacceptable.
Failure to meet the expectations listed in the above sections
may be considered grounds for dismissal.


It is expected that lead instructors and T.A.'s will carry out
their duties as outlined in their job descriptions and that conflicts
in jointly taught classes will be rare.

When possible, interpersonal conflicts should be handled by the
parties involved through direct discussion and compromise, whether
the conflict involves T.A.'s students, or the lead instructor,
always recognizing that the ultimate goal is to provide a good
learning environment for our undergraduates. If an affected party
feels uncomfortable handling the conflict directly, or if a problem
arises for which the party involved feels that direct discussion
is inappropriate, or if the conflict remains unresolved after
direct discussion, the following steps should be taken in the
order given, as appropriate.

1) Consult with the lead instructor.

2) Seek a mutually agreed upon mediator - possibly the Graduate
/Adviser.

3) Consult the department's chairman.

If a situation involving a T.A. is serious enough to involve possible
dismissal, written notification will be given to the T.A. indicating
deficiencies. If the deficiencies are not corrected in a timely
fashion, the matter will be referred to the Executive Committee.
T.A.'s may be relieved of their teaching responsibilities by the
Executive Committee in case of inadequate progress towards their
degree, use of alcohol or drugs, in such a way as to hinder their
performance as a T.A., or inadequate performance in their teaching
responsibilities as stated in the job description.



7. SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES FOR THE MASTER'S DEGREE


Procedure Responsibility Where Initiated
When


Application Student Graduate Office EARLY!

Registration Student With Grad. Adv. See academic calendar

Materials Grad. Adviser

Graduate Dean

Plan of Study Student Department During first quarter

of study

Qualifying Student Department During first year,

Exam preferably Fall Qtr.

Advancement Student Department, then After satisfactory

to Candidacy Grad. Adv. Grad. Office completion of 12 credits,

passage of Qual. Exam

Selection of Student Department After adv. to

project adv. Grad. Adv. candidacy

Oral exam Grad. Comm. Department Quarter prior to

Student final qtr.

Selection of Student Department After project's oral

thesis adviser exam

(Thesis option)

Thesis Defense Student Department By 4th week of final

Thesis Adv. quarter

Submission of Student Department 4 weeks before

thesis Grad. Office end of final qtr.

Colloq. talk Student Department follows oral

Application Student Department, Quarter prior to

for degree Grad. Office final quarter

(blue card)

Recomm. Grad. Adv. Department 2 weeks prior to

for degree Student end of quarter


Math Home WWU Home
WWU Index

Note: This page and the
pages linked to it are not official university documents.

You can send comments and suggestions to mathweb@henson.cc.wwu.edu

Last updated: 09/05/9


