






ETSU Employment Opportunities - Faculty Positions









East Tennessee State University




EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITIES

AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY/AFFIRMATIVE ACTION EMPLOYER
EMPLOYS ONLY U.S. CITIZENS AND
ALIENS AUTHORIZED TO WORK IN THE UNITED STATES

Faculty positions must remain open for a minimum
of 30 days. If you have questions concerning the availability of positions
previously posted, please contact the Office of Human Resources at (423)
439-4457 (voice only) and (423) 439-4710 (TDD).






FACULTY POSITIONS





Deadline Date


Open Positions



Open until filled
      (Posted 7/19/02)



    College of Nursing - Instructors, Assistant/Associate/Professors - (230630,
    

113570, 


    124200,
    

123830, 


    204550,
    

595600 and other grant based positions).  
    Tenure track and temporary faculty positions.  Faculty desiring to teach 
    acute care, administration, and psychiatric/behavioral health nursing, and 
    faculty with active clinical research programs are especially sought.  
    Positions immediately available for part-time teaching and rural 
    practice/teaching, including Hancock County.  Applicants with other interest 
    areas and minority candidates are encouraged to apply.  Qualifications: 
    tenure track candidates (academic focus) must have MSN, practice 
    experience, and doctorate in nursing or related field; teaching experience 
    and scholarship record are preferred; exceptional candidates completing the 
    doctorate may be considered.  Tenure track candidates (clinical focus) 
    must have MSN, practice experience, and advanced practice certification.  
    Clinical non-tenure track candidates (fixed term, renewable) must have 
    MSN and practice experience; teaching experience preferred for some 
    positions.  Temporary positions, contingent on funding, require MSN, 
    practice experience; some require advanced practice certification; 
    exceptional candidates completing the MSN may be considered; candidates must 
    have MSN before start of employment.  Send vitae and addresses of four 
    references to Dr. Nancy Alley, Associate Dean, College of Nursing, ETSU, Box
    

70617, Johnson City, TN 


    37614-1709.  Phone:  (423)
    

439-5626;  
    E-mail:  alleyn@etsu.edu.
 


Open until filled
      (Posted 6/27/02)


Academic Affairs - Teaching and 

    Learning Center - Director - INTERNAL SEARCH.  Essential functions:  responsible for operating 
    the center, including a variety of activities to promote the specific 
    purposes of the Teaching and Learning Center:  provide opportunities for 
    collegial exchange, instructional support, consultation and professional 
    development; provide identification of and coordination of resources; 
    provide greater visibility for resources and support available to faculty; 
    provide effective leadership in planning, oversight and assessment of 
    university faculty improvement activities; serve as a clearinghouse for 
    present and future teaching and learning activities.  Specific activities 
    include providing consultation upon request to faculty about their teaching, 
    arranging faculty development activities focused on pedagogy, developing 
    training in peer evaluation, developing support systems for part-time 
    faculty, staffing the Instructional Development Committee, planning and 
    conducting the New Faculty Orientation, and developing regular 
    communications with faculty.  The director has considerable latitude for 
    developing the programming and direction of the center.  Appointment and 
    Qualifications:  the position is open to tenured faculty at ETSU and is 
    a one-year appointment renewable up to three years.  The Teaching and 

    Learning Center is a joint project of the ETSU Faculty Senate and the 
    Division of Academic Affairs.  The director receives released time for nine 
    semester hours (60%) for 
    both fall and spring semesters plus a stipend for summer administrative 
    work.  Applicants should have at least three years of successful teaching 
    experience, good rapport with colleagues, interest in and commitment to 
    professional development for faculty, and a basic level of skills in 
    information technology and instructional technology.  Experience in 
    developing and delivering programs for training and/or professional 
    development is preferred.  Review of applications will begin July 

25 and continue until the position is filled.  The desired 
    starting date is 
August 


    15,
    

2002.  Send a letter of application, curriculum vitae, and 
    a statement describing interest and qualifications to Norma MacRae, Vice 
    Provost for Public Service, ETSU, Box 

70353, Johnson City, TN 


    37614-1702.   Materials and inquiries may be submitted to
    macraen@etsu.edu. 
 


Open until filled
      (Posted 5/8/02)



    College of Education - Department of Curriculum and Instruction - Clinical 
    Instructor - (2-11710).  The 
    department seeks a full-time clinical instructor to supervise field-based 
    clinical experiences for undergraduate and graduate pre-service students and 
    student teachers.  Essential functions:  instruction, mentoring, 
    evaluation, and assessment of student performance in various field-based 
    clinical experiences; maintenance of student records and data collection 
    related to performance assessment; participation in departmental, college 
    and university professional activities.  Qualifications:  master's 
    degree or higher; elementary and/or secondary certification; five years of 
    teaching experience.  Salary is $35,000 plus 
    benefits, non-tenure track.  Contact Dr. Elizabeth Ralston, Chair, Search 
    Committee, Department of Curriculum and Instruction, ETSU, 

    Box 

70684, 
    Johnson City, TN 

37614-1709.
 


Open until filled
      (Posted 5/8/02)

College of Education - University 
    School - Instructors - Two Positions Available - (123390, 123200). 
    Temporary one-year teaching positions involving mentoring of pre-service 
    educators and professional presentations in a year-round K-12 laboratory 
    school. Seeking creative, innovative, and energetic teachers who can 
    successfully use diverse strategies with students of varying abilities and 
    backgrounds. (1) Tenth Grade English, English elective and Journalism; (2) 
    High School Science and Environmental Science. Qualifications: master's 
    degree and the appropriate Tennessee license (or qualified for reciprocity 
    in Tennessee) by July 1, 2002; five years of successful teaching experience 
    and ability to sponsor or coach extracurricular activities preferred. 
    Positions to begin July 8, 2002. Submit a letter of intent, application, 
    copy of teaching license, copies of transcripts, and a resume with three 
    references to Dr. Dale Eineder, University School, ETSU, Box 70632, Johnson 
    City, TN 37614-1702. 
 


Open until filled
      (Posted 4/15/02)


College of Education - Department of Curriculum and 
    Instruction - Assistant Professor, Educational Media and Educational 
    Technology - SEARCH EXTENDED - (122120).  
    Position contingent upon state funding.  The department continues to seek a 
    full-time tenure track faculty member for the Educational Media and 
    Educational Technology Program.  Essential functions:  teaching in 
    the school library media program, recruiting and advising graduate students 
    in that program, directing and conducting research; and participating in 
    departmental, college, and university service.  Qualifications:  
    doctorate in library and information science, education media, education 
    technology or an appropriately related field (ABD will be considered if 
    terminal degree is received before date of employment or within one year of 
    employment).  Library experience in an education setting is preferred.  
    Position will be available 
July 


    01,
    

2002.  Review of applicants will begin immediately and 
    continue until position is filled.  Send letter of application, current 
    vita, transcripts, and three letters of recommendation to Dr. Leslie Perry, 
    Chair, Search Committee, Department of Curriculum and Instruction, ETSU, 


    Box 

70684, 
    Johnson City, TN 

37614-1709.    
    Email: perryla@etsu.edu
 


Open until filled
      (Posted 4/15/02)



    College of Education - Department of Curriculum and Instruction - Assistant 
    Professor, Reading Education - SEARCH EXTENDED - (123840).  
    Position contingent upon state funding.  The reading education position will 
    be a nine-month appointment.  The person seeking to fill this position must 
    hold a doctor of philosophy in reading and five years of teaching experience 
    at the elementary or secondary level.  The person will be responsible for 
    teaching undergraduate and graduate courses in reading, advising 
    undergraduate and graduate students, as well as conducting scholarly and 
    creative work.  Review of applicants will begin immediately and continue 
    until position is filled.   Send letter of application, current vita, 
    transcripts, and three letters of recommendation to Dr. Jane Melendez, Chair 
    Search Committee, Department of Curriculum and Instruction, ETSU,  


    Box 

70684, 
    Johnson City, TN 

37614-1709.   
    Email: melendez@etsu.edu 
 


August 30, 2002
      (Posted 4/2/02)


College of Arts and Sciences - Department of Biological 
    Sciences - Assistant Professor, Plant Biologist - (121810).  The department invites applications for a tenure track 
    assistant professor position, beginning 
January 


    1,
    

2003.  Teaching duties include an advanced course in plant 
    development, plant biology, and participation in general biology majors 
    sequence.  Will be responsible for developing active research program to 
    include B.S. and M.S. students.  Qualifications:  Ph.D. required by 
    start date, post-doctoral experience preferred; research specialization in 
    any area of plant biology using modern research approaches; plant 
    development especially encouraged; demonstrable commitment to teaching and 
    research required.  Applicants with broad botanical training are especially 
    encouraged.  Our departmental web page is
    http://www.etsu.edu/biology.  
    Send curriculum vitae, transcripts, statements of teaching and research 
    interests, and three letters of recommendation by August 

30, 


    2002 to 
    Dr. Cecilia McIntosh, Search Committee, Biological Sciences Department, 
    ETSU, Box 

70703, Johnson City, TN 


    37614-1710.   Phone:  (423)
    

439-5838;  
    Fax:  (423) 


    439-5958;  E-mail:  
    mcintosc@etsu.edu.
 


Open until filled
      (Posted 3/15/02)



    College of Nursing - Department of Professional Roles/Mental Health Nursing 
    - Chair - (124210).  The position sought is for Chair of the Department of 
    Professional Roles/Mental Health Nursing, a department which provides 
    courses in theory, research, nursing roles, management, and mental health in 
    outstanding BSN, MSN, and DSN programs.  Essential functions:  duties 
    involve leadership in curriculum; strategic planning; faculty mentoring and 
    evaluation; outcome evaluation related to these areas; as well as management 
    of departmental functions, participation on the college administrative team, 
    and other related duties as needed.  Qualifications:  must possess a 
    doctorate in nursing or related field, and a master's in nursing, an ability 
    to both lead and participate in collaborative, team-oriented activities; a 
    willingness to mentor others; a consistent record of research and 
    publication; experience in a leadership position in nursing education; and 
    experience in curriculum development and management are required.  A strong 
    record of external funding is preferred.  Send letter of interest, 
    curriculum vita, and four references to Dr. Marjorie King, c/o Dean's 
    Office, College of Nursing, ETSU, Box 


    70617, 
    Johnson City, TN 

37614-1709.
 


Open until filled
      (Posted 3/7/02)



    College of Arts and Sciences - Department of Foreign Languages - Assistant 
    Professor - (213620).  Assistant Professor of Spanish, tenure track, August
    


    2002.  To 
    teach courses in Spanish language (additional languages helpful).  Specialty 
    in Applied Linguistics or Second Language Acquisition preferred.  Duties 
    include teaching methods course and coordination of basic Spanish courses.  
    Research and service expectations.  Near-native or native fluency.  The 
    department, currently with seven full-time regular faculty members, teaches 
    Spanish, French, German and Japanese.  Departmental website at
    
    http://www.etsu.edu/cas/language/main.htm.  Qualifications:  
    Ph.D. in Spanish by hiring date.  Review of applications will begin 
    immediately and continue until the position is filled.  Submit letter, 
    CV, and dossier to Dr. Ken Hall, Chair, Department of Foreign Languages, 
    ETSU, Box 

70312, Johnson City, TN 


    37614-1701.   Phone:  


    423-439-6896;  
    Fax:  

423-439-4448;  E-mail:  
    khall@etsu.edu.
 


Open until filled
      (Posted 2/25/02)



    College of Arts and Sciences - Department of Social Work - Associate 
    Professor/Professor/Program Director - (123920).  Beginning August 2002, tenure track position associate 
    professor/professor/program director, if credentials and experience are 
    appropriate to serve as director of established BSW program with 150 
    majors.  Credit toward tenure is negotiable.  BSW-level teaching areas are 
    open.  Possible MSW teaching level if proposed MSW program begins Fall 
    2003.  Qualifications:  MSW degree, two years post master's 
    experience, and Ph.D. in social work or related field; significant 
    professional service activities, and a record of research/ scholarship.  
    Review of applications will begin immediately and will continue until the 
    position is filled.  Submit full curriculum vitae and the names, phone 
    numbers, and e-mail addresses of three references to James Ayers, Chair, 
    Search Committee, Department of Social Work, ETSU, Box 70645, Johnson City, 
    TN 37614-1702.   Phone:  (423) 439-5349;  e-mail: 
    ayersj@etsu.edu.    Refer to ETSU 
    website http://www.etsu.edu.
 


Open until filled
      (Posted 2/12/02)



    College of Arts and Sciences - Department of Psychology - Chair - (121220).  The department invites 
    applications for the position of Chair.  Essential functions:  
    responsible for leadership and advancement of the undergraduate and graduate 
    programs as well as establishing strong relationships with administration 
    that will aid in the progress of the department.  Qualifications:  
    must possess a Ph.D. in psychology (research specialization is open) and 
    experience commensurate with a rank of full or associate professor; evidence 
    of excellence in leadership, teaching, service, and research is required for 
    this position.  The department is comprised of eight full-time faculty 
    members as well as a number of adjunct faculty, and offers a master's degree 
    in both general and clinical psychology.  The James H. Quillen College of 
    Medicine is under the auspices of 

    East Tennessee State and has been highly ranked nationally in its primary 
    care and rural medicine education programs.  Further information concerning
    
East 

    Tennessee State University and the department of psychology is available at
    www.etsu.edu/psychology/ .  
    Applications will be accepted until 
April 15, 2002, or until the position is 
    filled.  Position contingent on state funding.  Minorities, women, veterans 
    and people with disabilities are encouraged to apply.  Send a letter of 
    application, curriculum vitae, representative publications, and three 
    letters of reference to Chair, Search Committee, Department of Psychology, 
    ETSU, Box 70649, Johnson City, TN 37614-1702.
 


Open until filled
      (Posted 2/1/02)


College of Public and Allied Health - Department of 
    Health Related Professions - Assistant/Associate Professor (B.S.A.H. 
    Degree), Director of Imaging Sciences - (110470).  The university invites 
    applications/ nominations for a tenure track position of assistant/associate 
    professor in the Department of Health Related Professions.  The individual 
    will become an integral part of the ongoing development of the Imaging 
    Science Programs in the Bachelors of Science in Allied Health.  
    Qualifications:  master's degree (doctorate preferred) and certification 
    in nuclear medicine or sonography required.  The preferred candidate will 
    hold certification in radiography by the ARRT; proficiency in curriculum 
    development, supervision, instruction, evaluation, and counseling; five 
    years full-time professional experience in the imaging sciences; a minimum 
    of three to five years of experience as an instructor in an accredited 
    imaging science program, a bachelors of science degree in imaging sciences, 
    program director experience; and demonstrated expertise in allied health 
    program development.  A description of the ETSU Department of Health Related 
    Professions can be found at
    
    http://www.etsu.edu/cpah/hrelated/index.htm.  Review of applications 
    will begin 
March 1, 2002.  The search will continue 
    until the position is filled.  Send letter of application, vita, and the 
    names, addresses and telephone numbers of at least three references to 
    Office of Human Resources, ETSU, Box 70564, Johnson City, TN 37614-1707.
 


Open until filled
      (Posted 1/08/02)


    College of Public and Allied Health - Department of Communicative Disorders 
    - Clinical Track, Speech-Language Pathology - Part-time, 12-month position 
    (2-11810/5-34095). 
    

    The position begins May 2002. Supervision of graduate student practicum and 
    provision of clinical services as needed. Qualifications: M.A./M. S., 
    CCC-SLP, Tennessee state licensure. Experience with clinical supervision and 
    with school-aged children preferred. Salary commensurate with qualifications 
    and experience. The department is a graduate only program that offers M.S. 
    degrees in speech-language pathology or audiology. Review of applications 
    will begin immediately and continue until the position is filled. Send 
    vita, three letters of recommendation and official transcripts to Teresa 
    Boggs, M.S., Search Committee, Department of Communicative Disorders, ETSU,
    

    Box 70643, Johnson City, TN 37614-0643. Phone: (423) 439-4535; e-mail:
    
    boggs@etsu.edu.  
 


Open until filled
      (Posted 12/21/01)

College of Education - Department 
    of Physical Education, Exercise and Sports Sciences - Assistant Professor - 
    Position Contingent upon State Funding - (2-11730).  Generalist 
    position to teach undergraduate and graduate courses in park and recreation 
    management. Previous teaching experience at the University level desired. 
    Ability to teach at least three of the following areas: introduction to, 
    programming in, and administration of leisure service programs, 
    interpretation of cultural and natural resources, natural resource 
    management, recreation for special populations, and outdoor/adventure 
    skills. Previous recreation leadership experience desired. Ability to 
    develop and lead extended outdoor experiences a must. Additional 
    responsibilities include directing student research and internships; 
    conducting scholarly research; advising students, and serving the university 
    and the profession. The candidate must exhibit a commitment to teaching 
    excellence. Earned doctorate in park and recreation management or closely 
    related field. Will consider ABD if the degree will be awarded before August 
    15, 2002. Candidates should submit a letter of application, a current 
    curriculum vitae, a transcript from their doctoral-granting institution, and 
    a list of four current references. Review of applicants will begin February 
    1, 2002 and continue until the position is filled. Pending availability of 
    funds, the contract will begin August 2002. Contact Dr. Tom Coates, 
    Chair, PEXS Department, ETSU Box 70654, Johnson City, TN 37614-1701.  
    E-mail:  coates@etsu.edu. 
    
 


Open until filled
      (Posted 11/28/01)



    College of Arts and Sciences - Department of Mathematics - Assistant 
    Professor - (2-11400).  The 
    department invites applications for a tenure track position in applied 
    mathematics at the assistant professor level beginning in August 2002.  
    Responsibilities of this position include teaching at the undergraduate and 
    graduate levels, directing masters' theses, and maintaining an active 
    research program.  We are particularly interested in candidates with 
    research experience in computational mathematics, operations research, or 
    optimization.  Successful applicants must have earned a doctorate in 
    mathematics or a closely allied field by August 2002.  Applicants must also 
    demonstrate clear evidence of strong teaching ability and research 
    potential.  The department offers B.S. and M.S. degrees.  ETSU, a member of 
    the state university system, has approximately 12,000 students.  Position 
    contingent upon state funding.  Review of applications will begin on 
    February 15, 2002 and continue until the position is filled.  For more 
    information, visit our web page at 
    http://www.etsu.edu/math.  Send a letter of application, an AMS cover 
    sheet, a current vita, and three letters of reference, one of which must 
    address teaching to Dr. Jay Boland, Search Committee Chair, Department of 
    Mathematics, ETSU, Box 70663, Johnson City, TN 37614-1701.
 


Open until filled
      (Posted 11/14/01)


College of Arts and Sciences - Department of 
    Communication - Assistant Professor, Speech Communication - (124170).  One 
    tenure track assistant professor position beginning August 2002.  The 
    successful candidate will have an earned doctorate, will teach undergraduate 
    and graduate speech communication courses, direct thesis, help support the 
    general mission of the Department of Communication and the university 
    through service activities, and conduct a program of research/creative 
    activity.  Candidates with expertise in one or more of the following areas 
    will be given special consideration:  health communication, research 
    methods, business/ professional communication, organizational communication, 
    and leadership.  An ability to teach argumentation and debate a plus.  The 
    successful candidate will also be expected to provide leadership for the 
    university's oral intensive program.  The speech communication division is 
    administered by the Department of Communication, which has more than 400 
    undergraduate majors and a newly established graduate degree program.  
    Review of applications will begin February 2002.  Position contingent upon 
    state funding.  Send vita and the names, telephone numbers, and addresses 
    of three references to Dr. Charles Roberts, Chair of the Speech Search 
    Committee, Department of Communication, ETSU, Box 70667, Johnson City, TN 
    37614-1701.
 


Open until filled
      (Posted 10/30/01)


College of Applied Science and Technology - Department of 
    Computer and Information Sciences - Assistant Professors - (2-11210).  Two 
    tenure track faculty positions available August 2002 pending funding.  
    Consideration will be given to candidates with a Ph.D. or masters in 
    computer science or a related field with appropriate experience.  Preference 
    will be given to candidates with, or nearing completion of, the Ph.D. in 
    computer science.  While candidates in all areas of computer science and 
    information technology will be considered, the following areas are 
    particularly desirable:  (1) web design/creation and internet application 
    development; (2) operating systems and architecture; and (3) software 
    engineering.  A demonstrated interest in and promise of excellence in 
    teaching a broad range of undergraduate and graduate courses is important.  
    Good written and oral English skills and evidence of, or potential for, 
    research, service and scholarly activity appropriate for tenure track 
    appointment are required.  Review of applications will begin immediately and 
    continue until the positions are filled.  Send resume, graduate 
    transcripts, a letter specifying areas of teaching interests, and three 
    letters of recommendation to Faculty Search Committee, Department of 
    Computer and Information Sciences, ETSU, Box 70711, Johnson City, TN 
    37614-1710.
 


Open until filled
      (Posted 10/30/01)


College of Applied Science and Technology - Department of 
    Technology - Assistant and Associate Professors - (2-11255).  
    Accepting applications for five tenure track positions, four faculty 
    assistant professors and a program director at the rank of associate 
    professor, available August 2002 pending funding.  B.S. and M.S. programs 
    include visualization, multi-media, hypermedia and product design.  The 
    program is located in attractive and extremely well equipped new 
    facilities.  We are seeking colleagues with vision and a commitment to 
    teaching and creative or applied research.  The position of program director 
    requires management expertise applicable to planning, managing and 
    evaluation of the academic program and the Niswonger Digital Media Center.  
    Minimum qualifications include M.S. or M.F.A. with skills appropriate for 
    one or more of the programs.  Good organization, written and oral 
    communication skills are required.  Review of applications will begin 
    immediately and continue until the positions are filled.  Visit our web site 
    at http://avl.etsu.edu.  Send a letter 
    of application, transcripts, resume, examples of work and three references 
    to Dr. James A. Hales, Niswonger Digital Media Center, ETSU, Box 70701, 
    Johnson City, TN 37614-1710.
 


Open until filled
      (Posted 10/30/01)



    College of Nursing - Instructors, Assistant/Associate/Professors - (230630, 
    113570, 205180, 120370, 124090, 206600, 124200, 123830, 204550, and grant 
    based positions).  The 
    College of Nursing, a part of the Division of Health Sciences, offers MSN 
    and BSN programs with over 850 majors; a DSN program is pending.  The 
    college is also well known for its strong emphasis on faculty practice and 
    community-based education, outstanding record in external funding, and 
    interdisciplinary programs.  New opportunities, changing and expanding 
    programs, and practice opportunities have created positions for talented 
    faculty.  Faculty are especially sought for the following anticipated 
    positions:  administration, acute care, psychiatric/behavioral health, 
    faculty with active clinical research programs.  Qualified applicants with 
    other areas of interest are invited to explore opportunities.  Minority 
    candidates are encouraged to apply.  Qualifications:  tenure track 
    candidates (academic focus) must have MSN, practice experience, and 
    doctorate in nursing or related field; teaching experience and scholarship 
    record are preferred; exceptional candidates completing the doctorate may be 
    considered.  Tenure track candidates (clinical focus) must have MSN, 
    practice experience, and advanced practice certification.  Clinical 
    non-tenure track candidates (fixed term, renewable) must have MSN and 
    practice experience; teaching experience preferred for some positions.  
    Temporary positions, contingent on funding, require MSN, practice 
    experience; some require advanced practice certification; exceptional 
    candidates completing the MSN may be considered; candidates must have MSN 
    before start of employment.  Applicants must demonstrate ability to 
    communicate effectively in written and spoken English, and be eligible for 
    RN licensure in Tennessee.  Review of applicants will begin immediately and 
    continue until positions are filled.  Rank commensurate with experience and 
    qualifications.  Send vitae and names and addresses of four references, 
    or requests for more information to Dr. Nancy Alley, Associate Dean, 

College of 
    Nursing, ETSU, Box 70617, Johnson City, TN 37614-1709.  Phone:  (423) 
    439-5626;  E-mail:  alleyn@etsu.edu.
 


Open until filled
      (Posted 10/15/01)



    College of Nursing - Associate Dean, Practice and Research - (216920).  Talented individual sought to serve as the Associate 
    Dean for Practice and Research.  This individual will report directly to the 
    Dean of Nursing, and will oversee the college's efforts to expand research, 
    scholarship, and grant activity; and lead the college's active faculty 
    practice, which includes nine nurse-managed primary care centers.  The 
    Associate Dean for Practice and Research is responsible for providing 
    leadership in all aspects of faculty practice including compliance, 
    personnel, strategic planning, evaluation, and integration of teaching, 
    research, and service into the practice sites.  Five clinic directors and 
    the business manager report to the associate dean.  This individual 
    supervises the Director of Research Services, promotes research and 
    scholarship among faculty, and monitors and facilitates grants management 
    within the college.  Qualifications:  must hold a terminal degree in 
    nursing or related field, a Master of Science in Nursing, and meet the 
    requirements for appointment at the level of associate professor or 
    professor, including an active record of scholarship, grants, and 
    publications; and possess exceptional interpersonal and organizational 
    skills.  Preference will be given to the candidate holding advanced practice 
    certification and a history of active practice.  Send letter of interest, 
    along with a curriculum vitae and the names, addresses, and telephone 
    numbers of at least four references to Dr. Nancy Alley, Chair, Search 
    Committee for Associate Dean for Practice and Research, College of Nursing, 
    ETSU, Box 70617, Johnson City, TN 37614-1709.
 


Open until filled
      (Posted 9/11/01)


College of Public and Allied Health - Department of 
    Public Health - Assistant/Associate Professors - (121670, 121790, 121910).  
    Three tenure/tenure track positions at the rank of assistant/associate 
    professor available August 2002.  The Department of Public Health offers a 
    CEPH-accredited Master of Public Health, Bachelor of Science and 
    interdisciplinary graduate certificates in health care management and 
    gerontology.  Through these programs, we offer concentrations in community 
    health, health administration, school health and patient education.  The 
    department has established strong ties with the colleges of medicine and 
    nursing, and emphasizes community-based research.  Essential functions:  
    the successful candidat