

Historiography Discussion Thread for H-Teach




Historiography Discussion Thread for H-Teach

Date:         Mon, 11 Apr 94 10:28:47 EDT
From: David Burr <OLIVI@VTVM1.BITNET>


Last year I taught our required Methods course for the first time. The
syllabus seemed itself methodologically sound: An orderly trip through the
major aspects of research, accompanied by group projects in which teams
prepared presentations on specific historical subjects. Around halfway
through the course I decided it wasn't working. Students were simply
accumulating data on How to Do History, much as they were accumulating
data to recite in the group presentations. They were gaining no insight
into the central element in my own activity as a historian. 


I threw the rest of the syllabus away and simply gave them a series of
passages: Narrative sources at first, like Gregory of Tours and Bede; then
more varied sources like wills or court records; then visual sources like
a scene from the Tres Riches Heures.  They were to write a paper a week. 
I told them to look as closely and attentively as possible and describe
what they saw; to tell me everything that particular artifact suggested
about the society that produced it; to ask one good question of that
artifact and answer it; any of these things.  The important thing was to
learn how to see, think creatively, and write well.  In class we discussed
what they'd written.  This was interspersed with rambling presentations on
my part, e.g. showing what a contemporary street map of an English town
can suggest about the medieval development of that town; asking how an art
restorer goes about his or her work; etc. 


By the end of the course I was so confused and discouraged that for the
first time in years I declined to ask the students to evaluate the course. 
In retrospect I suspect it was better than I imagined.  An abnormally high
percentage of these students have now taken my medieval and/or Renaissance
classes and two are now registered for the interdisciplinary Med-Ren
concentration.  I don't know what this means. 


David Burr



Date: Mon, 11 Apr 1994 08:40:26 -0700 (PDT)
From: Raymond McInnis <rgmc@HENSON.CC.WWU.EDU>


Numerous people on this list have inquired about successful methods of
teaching historical methods, historiography and the like to
undergraduates.  I am both an academic reference librarian and adjunct
professor of history. As adjunct prof, once a year I teach the History
dept's "Historical Methods and Analysis" class here at Western Washington
U, where the main concern is having the students write one competent
paper.  My formula is based on teaching principles of "audience,"
"authority," and "evidence." 


I think I have had a reasonable amount of success, and would attribute
this success to a different approach. As outlined in the article, "Running
Backwards From the Finish Line," *Library Trends* 39 (Winter,
1991):223-37, to successfully teach students the three "R"s of Inquiry,
"reading, writing, and research," early in the course, you need to assure
the students that they know more than they think they do; in addition,
students, faced with a steep learning curve, need a crutch. The "crutch"
gives me the opportunity to introduce the concepts of audience, authority,
and evidence. 


Rather than making students write papers from scratch, where they do have
a huge learning task, i.e., coming up to speed on the topic, and learning
how to write like a historian, both nearly impossible in a ten-week
quarter, instead I let them select from a pool an "op-ed" pieces, the
"crutch," usually from the NYT, which they are supposed to turn into a
paper. 


The focus of the course is 20th cent US intellectual and social history. 
Since the op-ed piece is written for a popular "audience," to redesign it
for a scholary one, students need to jump through all the hoops necessary
to achieve the "authority" of writing for an audience of professional
historians, and in the process of course must appropriately attend to
"evidence." (And, for the doubters, inspite of the fact that for this
exercise students are using a "crutch," experience suggests that in
subsequent courses they write much more competently from "scratch.")


As a rule, these op-ed pieces liberally allude to, but do not document,
historical facts and concepts. The class is held in a classroom in our
Library, and the Library is treated as a "lab". In the process of chasing
down these historical allusions, suitably documenting them, discussing
problems in class, and so on, students do acquire a measure of competence,
but more importantly, I believe, a measure of CONFIDENCE that they can
take risks without fear and not be set up to fail. 


Necessarily this account does not do justice to the task, but it might wet
somebody's curiosity. If you have any questions, do not hesitate to get in
touch. (I have a video of a student showing a class how he wrote a
successful paper.)


Raymond G. McInnis
Wilson Library
Western Washington University
Bellingham, WA  98225-9103
Internet:  rgmc@henson.cc.wwu.edu


Date: Tue, 12 Apr 1994 13:49:51 -0500 (CDT)
From: KJEFFREY@CARLETON.EDU

At Carleton, we have a course on historiography that is required of all
junior history majors.  Faculty members take turns teaching the course,
which has been in our curriculum for about ten years.  The major purpose
of the course is to give students an orientation to important approaches
to history now in use or recently in use.  We spend a week on Marxist
historiography, a week on the Annales school, a week on the revival of
narrative history, a week on gender history, etc.  Some topics are used
year after year (the Annales school, e.g.) while some depend on the
interests of the person teaching the course. I did a week on global
history last fall, for example, and used Jerry Bentley's recent book Old
World Encounters.  A key feature of the course is that we invite in a
historian whose work the students are reading.  In the term just past, the
visitor was Harvey Kaye of UW-Green Bay, author of works on E.P. Thompson
and the British Marxist tradition. 


Kirk Jeffrey
Carleton College
kjeffrey@carleton.edu


Date: Tue, 12 Apr 1994 12:24:33 -0600 (CST)
From: "Patrick Riordan" <riordanp@MAILER.FSU.EDU>


In message Mon, 11 Apr 1994 10:02:51 CDT,

   David Burr <OLIVI@VTVM1.BITNET> writes:


Last year I taught our required Methods course for the first time.
[Halfway through,] I threw the rest of the syllabus away and simply gave
them a series of passages: Narrative sources at first, like Gregory of
Tours and Bede; then more varied sources like wills or court records; then
visual sources like a scene from the Tres Riches Heures.  They were to
write a paper a week.  I told them to look as closely and attentively as
possible and describe what they saw; to tell me everything that particular
artifact suggested about the society that produced it; to ask one good
question of that artifact and answer it; any of these things.  The
important thing was to learn how to see, think creatively, and write well. 


By the end of the interdisciplinary Med-Ren concentration.  I don't know
what this means. 



I think it means that you engaged them both intellectually and creatively. 
You hit their forebrains, left brains and right brains. Too bad you didn't
let them give you the A+ evaluations that course sounds like it deserved. 
Keep up the good work. 


 Patrick Riordan                                       Ph.D. Candidate
 1717 Old Fort Dr.                               Department of History
 Tallahassee FL 32301                         Florida State University
 904-656-6552 (voice and data)              riordanp@mailer.cc.fsu.edu



Date: Thu, 14 Apr 1994 15:55:22 -0500 (CDT)
From: KJEFFREY@CARLETON.EDU

In reply to Elizabeth Ruth Dale's query of April 12 about Carleton's
required historiography course for junior history majors, I would say that
the primary purpose of the course is to help majors become better readers
of works of history.  It does not try to develop a history of historical
thought or to canvass and critique all major schools and approaches. 


Certain constraints shape what we do.  First, some of our newly declared
majors resist the notion of history as interpretation; they enjoy learning
colorful facts about past events. Some move into history because they
disliked the complex methodological apparatuses they encountered in other
departments, and apparently think of history as method-free.  The more
sophisticated new majors understand that history is more than "just the
facts" and may be quite intrigued by interpretive debates; but they don't
quite know how to orient themselves to all this and may lack skills at
analyzing the argument and assumptions of a historian. 


Second constraint is that we take turns teaching the course.  It is
nobody's baby to develop and revise over a period of years.  This I am
afraid has kept the aims quite modest: it is essentially a course on how
to read. 


The course operates as a discussion seminar.  We throw at the students a
succession of books or important articles.  The students usually have a
rough idea that this writer works in the Marxist tradition or that one
does gender history, but we don't give background lectures on what is
distinctive about the Annalistes or what Marxist historians are about or
anything like that.  We try to get them to tease out the author's approach
and assumptions, to identify the defining features of the book whatever
its specific topic might be.  The course thus focuses more on concrete
examples than on generalizations about schools of interpretation or the
history of historical thought. 


Works that we use more or less regularly include Mattingly's The Armada,
Darnton's The Great Cat Massacre, Davis's The Return of Martin Guerre,
papers by E.P. Thompson such as "Time, Work-Discipline, and Industrial
Capitalism" and "The Moral Economy of the English Crowd," and excerpts
from Novick's That Noble Dream.  I think we may start using the new book
by Appleby, Hunt, and Jacob, Telling the Truth about History.  We also use
a number of articles recently published in the journals that exemplify
current thinking. 


The list obviously shows the shaping hand of Europeanists in our
department and the formative influence for many of us of the kind of
social history that flourished in the 1960s and 70s.  The list is changing
as younger members of the department, mostly non-Europeanists, take their
turn as instructors. 


Kirk Jeffrey
Carleton College
kjeffrey@carleton.edu


Date: Thu, 14 Apr 1994 14:25:14 +0100
From: M. Haynes <le1958@ccub.wlv.ac.uk>
University of Wolverhampton UK
le1958@ccub.wlv.ac.uk

It seems to me that a lot depends on the level of the course. When I
started teaching many years I was a great enthusiast for bringing in
historiography at the lowest level. The way I did it was a disaster - much
as described by someone else and the worse thing was the student who came
at the end and said he loved history but I had put him off for life.
Rather than abandon the idea of introducing students to importance of
historiography, however, I persisted and developed a small introductory
seminar package to front an introductory European history survey course
that I think works very well. 


Week 1 involves a discussion of a list of books and articles to try to
identify what was a primary and a secondary source. The discussion always
starts at a very elementary level but could get quite sophisticated as
students speculated about the nature of book. We start with a simple one
that tripped everyone up about the second world war - published in 1980s -
obviously secondary they say - but was he there, is it memoirs, a diary,
what would it be if it was Churchill's History of the Second World War?. 


Week 2 involves a discussion of the introduction to George Rude's Debate
on Europe where he sets out the various influences affectuing how
historians work. This is a very simple and straightforward account of the
role of class, nationality, religion, time etc. plus he forgets some
important things which gives the studnts some extra space. This book is a
must. When Rude died last year Eric Hobsbawm wrote that it was his best
book. I wouldn't go this far but it is a superb discussion of the
historiography of European history in the years 1815-1848. During this
seminar I make a deliberate point of banning the use of the term bias in
favour of interpretation but promise to confront bias later. But I also
ensure that we have a discussion of the question of whether all
interpretations are equally valid and especially whether the solution is
that the truth lies in the middle - I found the holocaust a good example
to warn people against this view. 


Week 3 involves a deliberate return to analyse sources to try to see both
what they might tell us and how interpretations might differ. I
deliberately used an orla source - a folk song and contrasted it with an
official government report of witnesses - British 1842 Report on Women and
Children in the Mines. This enables a discussion to take place both about
the way the evidence was constructed at the time and reactions to it
later. Most first year students start by assuming that an official report
has more credibility than a folk song but the report in question is merely
oral evidence written down. 


Week 4 involves a discussion of the crucial issue of interpretation and
bias. I begin with a series of photos of the same thing cut in different
ways and then ask the students to interpret them. As the cut of the photo
changes so their interpretation changes. Then we discuss which photo shows
what happened? The brightest ones see without help that even the
photograph taken by the photographer was itself an interpretation since a
selection had to be made. We then move to a discussion of chapter 1 of
E.H.Carr's What is History. Here he discusses what is a fact. The first
part helpfully shows why facts do not speak for themselves but the second
part of the chapter explicitly warns against assuming that all
interpretations are equal. He uses the nice analogy of the mountain -
depending on where we stand the mountain has a different shape but this
does not mean it has no shape or a multiplicity of shapes. We then try to
discuss the way in which we can distinguish between the validity of
different types of interpretations and when a differnence of
interpretation becomes bias. 


Week 5 - at the end of this week the students are asked to submit an
assignment based on 1. summarising Carr's arguments in 1000 words. 2.
Writing a 750 word comparison of extracts from the introduction to
E.Hobsbawm's Age of Revolution; P.Stearns, Europeran Society in Upheaval
and D.Thompson, Europe Since Napoleon - as examples of marxist,
conservative and liberal interpretations as well as different types of
history etc. I tell the students that each one represents one of these
historiographical traditions as well as reflecting different nationalists,
timing etc. but deliberately do not tell the students which are which.
Finally the studnets are asked to say in 250 words how Carr helps them and
whether they agree with him. The first chapter contains the famous advice
'study the historian before you study his work'. 


Being at an intrudctory level I try to mark this generously and encourage
the students who will know nothing of the historians to make informed
speculations or look for evidence. But I insist that they do not have to
read widely beyond the extracts since the point is largely to read between
the lines. What Carr calls listening for the buzz. 


What does this achieve? I have used this with first year European history
groups for many years and believe that in this way it does introduce
students to the problems in a way they find manageable. It will not be
what one would do at a post-graduate level but here the students are more
sophisticated and aware and not so easily put off. As the course
subsequently progresse with more traditional seminars it is then possible
to build on this introdution to develop the ideas of different
historiographical traditons around key issues like the French Revolution,
1848 or whatever. 



Date: Tue, 18 Oct 94 08:27:56 CST
From: Ken Wolf <A23211F@MSUMUSIC>


Judy, for the historiography section of your course, I would highly
recommend several books which my beginning MA students here have found
interesting, challenging, and (in the second case) positively exciting.
The first is Peter Novick, "The Noble Dream: The `Objectivity Question'
and the American Historical Profession (Cambridge, 1988 paper) and James
Davidson and Mark Lytle, "After the Fact: The Art of Historical Detection"
(McGraw-Hill, 1992; third edition paper). 


The first is a work of intellectual history but one that is very well
organized.  The vocabulary troubles some of the students who puzzle over
words such as "comity" and "adumbrate"--but I tell them that this is just
part of growing up intellectually and that when I began graduate school
and was troubled by such words, I just quietly looked them up, lest I
embarrass myself (they complain aloud; times have changed).  This is, in
my judgment, the best book currently available on the history of history
in the United States.  After the Fact is an exciting interdisciplinary
look at problems in American history/historiography but mainly talks about
the methods historians can and have used--including psychohistory, textual
analysis, use of models and other forms of social scientific analysis,
photographic evidence, etc. etc. Much of the book reads like a detective
story.  It was designed originally to be used in a US Survey course as an
adjunct to a textbook, though I think it has been used mainly in methods
and historiography classes.  Our students here from beginning History
majors to graduate students all love it.  Good luck. 


Ken Wolf, Department of History
Murray State University
Murray, KY 42071 (502) 762-6582 or 762-2232
e-mail <A23211f@MSUMUSIC.Bitnet>



For those interested in getting a first cut on a variety of "new" fields
(always a dubious proposition), which fall under the broad category of
"new Social History", see Peter Burke, ed., New Perspectives on
Historical Writing (University Park, Pa., 1992). I used this with great
success one week in my graduate class on history theory this term.  Of
course, Joyce Appleby, et.al., Telling the Truth about History, is the
most recent narrative of the development of the profession.



Judy,


A recent book you might try is Telling the Truth About History by Joyce
Appleby, Lynn Hunt, and Margaret Jacob (Norton, 1994). 


Jim Brown
Sun0.elon.edu
Elon College



Date: Thu, 20 Oct 1994 09:39:10 -0500 (CDT)
From: KJEFFREY@carleton.edu

Another book on recent developments in historical thought to consider with
Novick's That Noble Dream is the new book by Joyce Appleby, Lynn Hunt,
and Margaret Jacob entitled Telling the Truth about History.  It is not
out in paperback yet but soon will be. 


I have been using the book this fall and my students find it easier going
than Novick.  It is a lot shorter, for one thing. Yet its scope is quite
broad: it discusses the scientific revolution and the authority of science
in modern intellectual life, the recent questioning of scientific
authority, and the way history as a discipline has been thrown into some
disarray by the declining authority of the scientific model.  It also
discusses issues of national identity and multiculturalism in the American
context. 


Appleby et al. come down more in the epistemological center than does
Novick.  They consider but ultimately step back from the rejection of
objectivity. 


Those interested in Novick's critique of objectivity might find Tom
Haskell's critique of Novick interesting too.  It appears in History &
Theory, vol. 29 (1990, no. 2).  Haskell argues that Novick rhetorically
trashes objectivity but in practice scrupulously follows traditional
canons of objective analysis. 


Haskell also suggests that Novick's definition of objectivity is peculiar,
not the one that in fact reigns among practicing historians. 


Kirk Jeffrey
kjeffrey@carleton.edu

Date: Wed, 2 Nov 94 01:35 CST
From: "GEORGE M. KREN" <KRENG@KSUVM>


The course we teach here (Kansas State Univ) in historiography is similar
to that described by Ken Wolf.  In the first part of the course students
read and discusss several historiographical works: 
 Breisach, HISTORIGRAPHY which serves as a text to cover the history of
historical writing P Novick THAT NOBLE DREAM for its review of American
historical writing, as well as introducing questions about objectivity and
relativism. Georg Iggers, THE GERMAN CONCEPTION OF HISTORY which is above
all useful for it's discussion of the origin and development of
historicism, as well as the i pact of Nazism on historical writing--the
chapters on Troeltscha and Meinecke are particularly valuable Peter Gay,
FREUD FOR HISTORIANS which provides a critical but sympathetic discu ssion
of psychohistory Paul Buhle, HISTORY AND THE NEW LEFT which discusses the
new left and Madison in the 60's and gives a concrete setting to the
issues of historical writing and studying in the 60's Students also read
Peter Loewenberg's essay on graduate study (in DECODING THE PAST), a
psychohistorical investigation of graduate study which suggests that both
student and teacher at times act out a unstated agenda. and for writing I
have found Howard Becker, WRITING FOR SOCIAL SCIENTISTS of unestimable
value. (Students also buy Kate Turabian's MANUAL FOR WRITRS for the nuts
and bolts of footnoting etc. 


The second part of the courses consists of a discussion of papers
previously Xe roxed and distributed to all members of the class.  These
vary from semester to semester--this time around they include papers on
Spengler, Women's history, the Annales, the Historikerstrei, Max Weber and
Gerhard Ritter.


 George M. Kren,
 Eisenhower Hall,
 Dept of History,
 Kansas State University,
 Manhattan, KS 66506  



Date:          Tue, 1 Nov 1994 09:44:53 -0600 (CST)
From:          Kristin Eldyss Sorensen Zapalac <kzapalac@artsci.wustl.edu>


Barbara --


We seem to have the greatest difficulty around the area of religion
(Xianity is "true religion" others are "magic" and "superstition,"  etc. I
find myself -- for the first time in an undergraduate classroom --
acknowledging my own Xian beliefs in order to stress that I as historian,
if I am to understand my subjects, must avoid judging their beliefs
because that blocks understanding.  My usual trite example when pushed by
them is that it's much more useful to understand even a Hitler and
certainly why he was able to sway so many people than simply to judge
him). I try to focus on issues of perspective and the ways in which
"history" has been used in the past (Bruni's revision of the founding date
of Florence when the city is under attack from non-republics [aka a
simplified version of the Baron thesis] is a recent case in point].... 


Another example: I stress the changing views of the meaning of "Greece"
and Periclean Athens: beginning with bits of Charles Kahn's old video on
"The Golden Age," and wearing a regimental tie as he does (I'm female) I
announce that I still can't adopt his perspective because I'm standing at
a differnt point, 25 years later.  I retell (using the overhead projector)
the part of the Agamemnon he has just massacred, by showing the chorus'
(Aeschylus'?) very different view of the Trojan War and Agamemnon's
return.  Then I go on to show how the stress he lays on Athenian democracy
under Pericles wasn't Thucydides's view or that of subsequent thinkers...
how most referred to the Roman Republic when they wanted to justify some
form of quasi-representative government.  How even American writers of the
colonial period often stressed the dangers of democracy, the need for
slaves to maintain a politically active citizenry, etc.  In other words,
we try to give them both the tradition and to show how useful that
tradition has been from some perspectives.  To revise the tradition where
necessary.  And always, always, to emphasize perspective. 


Kris Zapalac
History
Washington University in St Louis
kzapalac@artsci.wustl.edu

PS.  I taught with an anthropologist (another course) last year and was
astonished to hear him use the term "primitive"  without discussion or
analysis.... Hope this helps.



Date:          Sat, 29 Oct 1994 22:58:07 -0500
From:          Barbara.T.Norton@cyber.Widener.EDU
Subject:      Presentism in students


 Having just graded the semester's second set of Western Civ exams, I find
myself wondering yet again how to combat the fallacy of presentism so
prevalent among students.  How do the rest of you deal with the
understandable but unhelpful inclination on their part to judge--and, too
often this means condemn as "primative," "ignorant," "stupid," etc.--the
customs, attitudes and ideas of the ancient and medieval worlds? 
Reminding my classes about their 20th century perspective is obviously not
enough.  Has anyone got any "tricks" that will drive the point home? 


 Barbara T. Norton
 (barbara.t.norton@cyber.widener.edu)


  Skip Knox     Boise State University      Boise, Idaho
       cogito ergo spud:  I think, therefore I yam



Date:          1 Nov 1994 02:33:31 U
From:          "Lucy Moye" <lucy.moye@ac.hillsdale.edu>


I, too, have been pagued and disturbed by my students' recurring
assertions that the Greeks are more advanced than the Mesopotamians, the
Romans conquered other peoples due to their superior intellect and, most
often, that monotheistic religions, especially Christianity, are more
effective and complex than polytheistic religions.  Unfortunately, the
most effective argument I've found to convince them is "It's just not
right to phrase it that way."  It disturbs me even more that my students
find arbitrary rules the most effective argument, since I'm convinced they
still think the various cultures we study are all naturally progressing
toward modern America. However, I guess getting them to talk correctly is
better than nothing. 


Aren't we dealing with two phenomena here?  One is the tendency of
students (and others) to think modern culture is wonderful, in which case
the antidote to their dismissive judgment of the past is to point out that
we live in a house made of the thinnest plate glass.  The other is simple
fact that Western historical thinking tends to be linear.  Things from the
past contribute to other things in the future.  We teach introductory
history, at least in part, to show students that the world they live in is
a product of many centuries of development.  For that reason, I don't have
any problem with their thinking that the Greeks were more advanced than
the Mesopotamians--provided they don't think that makes them *better* than
the Mesopotamians.  Nor would I presume to attempt to convince my students
that Christianity and polytheism were morally equivalent.  But I like to
think that they can begin to learn to deal gently with the past, giving
the dead credit for their achievements and trying, at least, to understand
them as they understood themselves. 


Surely getting them to talk correctly--by pointing out that it's the
historian's job to describe and to analyze, not to judge, and by being
scrupulously even-handed in one's own lectures--is a prelude to
encouraging them to think correctly? 


Lucy Moye
Hillsdale College
lucy.moye@ac.hillsdale.edu


Date:          Tue, 1 Nov 1994 20:02:11 -0500
From:          DKLewis@aol.com


This problem is a bit easier for us teaching the modern era.  The Western
faith in progress represents a key component of 19th century "scientific"
thought, after all.  By shifting students' focus to the artistic and
intellectual rebellion against such faith or by spending time on the
cultural impact of events like World War I, it is relatively easy to show
students the mistake that "presentism" represents (a mistake we all easily
fall into).



Date: Wed, 02 Nov 94 13:13:23 CST
From: Ken Wolf <A23211F@MSUMUSIC>


To Jody Ross in particular--what is a historiographical essay and why is
it so dreaded by many? 


The biggest problem which beginning MA students here have with
historiogrphical essays is understanding what historiography is (as well
as how to spell it!).  I tell them that historiography is, in short, the
history of history.  This means that the primary sources for a
historiographical essay are the works written by historians and others
about an event, i.e. their interpretations of the event.  Such
interpretations would be normally considered secondary sources if one were
doing a research essay on the event itself.  Some very good students find
themselves excited by a particular controversy and want to look at the
many different points of view on it so they can unravel "what really is
the truth." OK, say I, but remember that in a HISTORIOGRAPHICAL essay, the
focus must be on what others say, not your own unraveling of the mystery. 
You must analyze the views of others; these, and not the event itself,
must be the primary subject of the essay, of the analysis and of your
judgments.  I hope this doesn't sound too silly.  It is a real point of
confusion for some.  Have I helped any? 


Ken Wolf, Department of History
Murray State University
Murray, KY 42071 (502) 762-6582 or 762-2232
e-mail <A23211f@MSUMUSIC.Bitnet>


Date: Fri, 4 Nov 1994 17:24:05 -0500 (EST)
From: Prof Chris Hamel <chamel@hawk.anselm.edu>


Jody:


On the "great historiographical question" suggest you check out Gilderhus'
introductory but important HISTORY AND HISTORIANS 2nd edition (1994). Two
chapters on speculative and analytical interpretations worth a quick
glance. Always glad to see colleagues interested in fundamental issues of
history. 


Cheers to you and the gang at MSU


Chris Hamel



Date: Sun, 26 Feb 95 14:01 EST
From: lr20 <Leslie_S_ROWLAND@umail.umd.edu>


My department's undergraduate committee is discussing the possibility of
creating a required course for history majors on the methods and skills of
history.  We have found that most of our majors are not adequately
prepared when they arrive at the required "capstone" course (proseminar in
history writing), in which they are expected to write a sizable paper
based upon primary sources.  Our idea is to create a new methods/skills
course as a prerequisite for the capstone seminar.  The new course would
be taken in second semester sophomore year or first semester junior year. 


Thusfar we've been thinking about a course with many short writing
assignments, not a long paper.  Among the topics and skills that might be
included: identifying an historical argument, the questions historians
ask, context, modes of historical writing, types of evidence, library
skills, analyzing primary sources, interpretation, maybe a little
historiography, scholarly citation. 


A major question is whether such methods and skills can be taught apart
from a particular geographical/chronological content; i.e., can we devise
an effective course that would include students whose areas of
concentration range from African history to East Asian to Latin American
to European to U.S., etc? One approach might be to work through the skills
generically, with examples and exercises drawn from all areas of history. 
Another would be to structure the course around a "big"
theme--revolutions, for example, then divide the course into three parts,
each focusing on a different revolution.  Perhaps there are still other
possibilities. 


Another big question is proper size for such a course.  How large can it
be and still be effective? 


We would appreciate advice about what works and doesn't work from folks
who have ever taught (or taken) such a course.  Syllabi and/or reading
lists would be particularly helpful.  If you do not think your responses
would interest the whole list, send directly to me (Leslie Rowland): 


e-mail:   lr20@umail.umd.edu

regular mail:  Department of History, University of Maryland, College Park
MD 20742



Date: Sun, 26 Feb 95 17:26:47 EST
From: SMUMM@VM2.YorkU.CA

We've been developing a course at York for second year students,
tentatively entitled The Historian's Craft. It is designed to provide a
framework in which most subject specializations can be taught. It
essentially combines a little simple historiography, some sessions on
historical writing, the uses of computers in history, how to read primary
sources, basic research methods, etc. We may use Lowenthal's The Past is
a Foreign Country as the primary text, supplemented by books appropriate
to the instructor's interests (2 instructors per course).


 Susan Mumm,
 History, Atkinson College,
 York U, Toronto



Date: Mon, 27 Feb 1995 10:33:56 -0500 (EST)
From: MAJ Robert G Baker <rbaker@norfolk.nadn.navy.mil>


AT THE US NAVAL ACADEMY WE DO THIS IN THE SOPHOMORE YEAR (EITHER 1ST OR
SECOND SEMESTER) THE COURSE IS CALLED HH262--PERSPECTIVES IN HISTORY. IT
INTRODUCES THE MAJOR TO HISTORIOGRAPHY AND RESEARCH METHODS.  TOPICS VARY. 
FOR EXAMPLE, THIS SEMESTER WE HAVE 6 SEMINARS WITH THE FOLLOWING TOPICS:
SPORT AND CULTURE IN AMERICA; WORLD WAR II IN THE PACIFIC; WORLD WAR II IN
EUROPE; VICHY FRANCE; IMPERIAL JAPAN; HISTORY OF THE US NAVY. NEXT
SEMESTER WE WILL OFFER: SPORT AND CULTURE IN AMERICA; HISTORY OF SOUTH
AFRICA; HISTORY OF THE US MARINE CORPS; TRADITION AND REVOLUTION IN MODERN
CHINA.  EACH SEMINAR IS LED BY A DIFFERENT PROF. 

RBAKER@NORFOLK.NADN.NAVY.MIL


 Date: Sun, 26 Feb 95 14:01 EST
 From: lr20 <Leslie_S_ROWLAND@umail.umd.edu>


 My department's undergraduate committee is discussing the possibility of
 creating a required course for history majors on the methods and skills of
 history.  We have found that most of our majors are not adequately prepared
 when they arrive at the required "capstone" course (proseminar in history
 writing), in which they are expected to write a sizable paper based upon
 primary sources.  Our idea is to create a new methods/skills course as a
 prerequisite for the capstone seminar.  The new course would be taken in
 second semester sophomore year or first semester junior year.


 Thusfar we've been thinking about a course with many short writing
 assignments, not a long paper.  Among the topics and skills that might be
 included: 
   identifying an historical argument, the questions historians ask,
   context, modes of historical writing, types of evidence, library 
   skills,  analyzing primary sources, interpretation, maybe a little 
   historiography, scholarly citation.


A major question is whether such methods and skills can be taught apart
from a particular geographical/chronological content; i.e., can we devise
an effective course that would include students whose areas of
concentration range from African history to East Asian to Latin American
to European to U.S., etc? One approach might be to work through the skills
generically, with examples and exercises drawn from all areas of history. 
Another would be to structure the course around a "big"
theme--revolutions, for example, then divide the course into three parts,
each focusing on a different revolution.  Perhaps there are still other
possibilities. > > Another big question is proper size for such a course. 
How large can it be > and still be effective? > > We would appreciate
advice about what works and doesn't work from folks who > have ever taught
(or taken) such a course.  Syllabi and/or reading lists would > be
particularly helpful.  If you do not think your responses would interest >
the whole list, send directly to me (Leslie Rowland): > > e-mail: 
lr20@umail.umd.edu > > regular mail:  Department of History, University of
Maryland, College Park > MD 20742 > > Editor's note: please do consider
sending responses to the whole list: > this sounds a topic very much of
interest to H-Teach members. SWTucker


Date: Mon, 27 Feb 1995 09:51:28 -0600
From: Owen Duncan <duncano@storm.simpson.edu>


Re previous post:


Date: Sun, 26 Feb 95 14:01 EST
From: lr20 <Leslie_S_ROWLAND@umail.umd.edu>


My department's undergraduate committee is discussing the possibility of
creating a required course for history majors on the methods and skills of
history.  We have found that most of our majors are not adequately
prepared when they arrive at the required "capstone" course (proseminar in
history writing), in which they are expected to write a sizable paper
based upon primary sources.  Our idea is to create a new methods/skills
course as a prerequisite for the capstone seminar.  The new course would
be taken in second semester sophomore year or first semester junior year. 


I do not have the experience requested, but I have considered such a course
for our students and recommend at least looking at History: A workbook of
skill development, by Conal Furay and Michael J. Salevouris, published by
New Viewpoints.  I met Salevouris at an NEH seminar twenty years ago and
was very impressed with him, and I think I might try this workbook for a
sophomore course in methodology.


Owen Duncan
Simpson College
duncano@storm.simpson.edu


Date: Mon, 27 Feb 1995 11:08:30 -0500 (EST)
From: 00aoedmonds@bsuvc.bsu.edu

To those looking for info on history methods courses, try the most recent
issue of the OAH Department Chairs Newsletter.  I edited the issue on
just such courses at Ball State and Western Washington. 


                         Tony Edmonds, History, Ball State U



Date: Mon, 27 Feb 95 10:58:52 EST
From: Randy Patton <rpatton@kscmail.Kennesaw.Edu>


Here at Kennesaw State College, all history and history education majors
are required to take, hopefully by the end of their sophomore year,
"History 275:  An Introduction to Local History and Methodology." The
instructors use the book AFTER THE FACT to introduce methodology to
students.  Students also are required to visit various local historical
archives (one of the perks of being in the Atlanta area). The major
requirement of the course is a research paper based on primary sources on
a local history topic.  Focusing on local history topics helps students
pick subjects for which they can literally almost exhaust the sources. 
Just last year, a Kennesaw State History 275 student won a National
Archives (East Point, GA branch) essay contest for a paper on the Atlanta
viaduct based on papers from the Archives and the Atlanta History Center. 
We have found the combination of methodology and local history to be an
effective way to stimulate student interest and move away from
traditional, greatly overdone research topics. 


Randy Patton



Date: Mon Feb 27 09:28:31 CST 1995
From: mforet@uwspmail.uwsp.edu

My colleague Eric Yonke and I are also in the process of developing an
introductory course for history majors, to be taken in the sophomore year,
and for the same reason: too many of our upper level students were
unprepared for advanced work, even in their final semesters.  We will be
working on the details during the summer, and Eric will offer the course
for the first time during Fall 1995.  We too are still working out how
best to approach it, whether to tie it to some topic course, or simply do
it as a straight methods approach to historiography, specialized fields,
documentation, schools, etc. 


Based on my own personal experience and that of my students, I think we
can no longer afford to pretend that our students absorb an understanding
and knowledge about the profession and its practice through osmosis. 
Whether it is the fact that they do not read as much as past generations
of college students, or that they had social studies rather than history
in high school, or that we're just trying to cram too much material into
our courses, they`re getting to upper level courses without appropriate
knowledge and skills. 


Like Leslie, I hope others are doing the same thing, and will contribute
their ideas or experience to this discussion.  I look forward to lots of
interaction on this. 


P.S. Having a sophomore course laying the foundation for the senior
courses should make assessment easier and more useful, which is another
good reason for doing this. 


Michael Foret
University of Wisconsin-Stevens Point
mforet@uwspmail.uwsp.edu


Date: Mon, 27 Feb 1995 22:42:05 -0500
From: Daniel Klenbort <klenbort@halcyon.com>


Re previous posts including:
I do not have the experience requested, but I have considered such a course
for our students and recommend at least looking at History: A workbook of
skill development, by Conal Furay and Michael J. Salevouris, published by
New Viewpoints.  I met Salevouris at an NEH seminar twenty years ago and
was very impressed with him, and I think I might try this workbook for a
sophomore course in methodology.


Owen Duncan
Simpson College
duncano@storm.simpson.edu

I also have no experience teaching such a course, but I have used bits of
the above Furay and Salevouris in history majors' class and find it
helpful.


 Daniel Klenbort,  Morehouse College Klenbort@Halcyon.com
"Never argue with a man who is convinced the earth is flat. You have
thought about why it is round for maybe five minutes. He spends every
waking minute thinking up arguments that it is flat and, he believes if
only he could convince everyone, then the problems of the world would be
solved" Bud Foote



Date: Tue, 28 Feb 1995 1:01 pm EST (18:01:17 UT)
From: George C. Browder <BROWDER@fredonia.edu>


At SUNY Fredonia, we have been using the Fury and Salevouris Workbook for
several years in a sophomore methods course, and it has been very
successful as the core of our program - not popular, even feared by
insecure students until they have mastered it, but usually appreciated
thereafter. 



Date: Tue, 28 Feb 1995 11:03:51 -0800 (PST)
From: Robert Cherny <cherny@mercury.sfsu.edu>


[Re previous post, exerpts to follow:]


 My department's undergraduate committee is discussing the possibility of
 creating a required course for history majors on the methods and skills of


I've been teaching such a course off and on for twenty years, and nearly
every semester in recent years.  We require two undergraduate seminars of
our majors:  History 300, which introduces the methods and skills of
history, and which we urge them to take at the end of their sophomore
year or beginning of their junior year; a proseminar, which is their
culminating experience and taken in their senior year.


 A major question is whether such methods and skills can be taught apart from
 a particular geographical/chronological content; i.e., can we devise an


My experience says yes, and that it is advantageous to do so.  I emphasize
that the purpose of the course is to focus on the historian, not the
particular subject matter, and I keep them focused on the historian
throughout.  Thus, the course can be taught by instructors from a variety
of specializations and can be worthwhile for students regardless of their
special interests.  I require a term research project and permit them to
chose a topic of interest to themselves, but require that the topic be one
for which primary sources are easily available, because I want to them
spend their time working with the sources and not finding them.  I also
veto topics that I know little about, because I want to be able to provide
constant guidance as their projects develop. They do a series of papers on
this topic, and I stress the process as much as the final result. 


Their second seminar, the culminating experience, is focused on a topic,
preferably one of interest to the students.


We usually run four sections of each every semester, so there are always
choices for topic of the culminating experience course; for the
proseminar, we usually have two in American history, one in European
history, and one in world history that permits individual research on any
region. 


 Another big question is proper size for such a course.  How large can it be
 and still be effective?


Undergraduate seminars are limited to a maximum enrollment of 20, but my
experience has been that I can enroll up to 25 and end up with about 15.
Fifteen is ideal.


My syllabus follows.  I've occasionally inserted comments in square
brackets to explain why I do certain things that may otherwise seem curious.



                          HISTORY 300
                 SEMINAR IN HISTORICAL ANALYSIS
          Section 2:  7:00-9:45 p.m., Mondays, Burk 204
           Spring 1995               Robert W. Cherny


Course Overview:  Unlike most history courses, which focus on past events,
this course focuses centrally on the work of historians--the nature and location 
of sources for historical research, written and oral presentation of
research findings, and criticism of others' work.  You will each practice
these skills.  We shall also briefly explore the development of history as a
field of knowledge, from its beginnings in the ancient world, through its
emergence as a profession, to twentieth-century developments in historical
analysis.  As you complete the assignments, you will find opportunities to
apply the skills you have learned in Segment I of General Education:  written
and oral communication, critical thinking, and quantitative reasoning.  If you
have not completed Segment I, please see me to discuss your situation.


Course Requirements:  During the first six weeks of the semester, you will
prepare a paper for every class meeting; after that, there will be one inclass 
examination, dealing with the history of history.  You will also present
your research project in both in writing and orally, and you will criticize
the research projects of two other students, orally and in writing.  These requirements 
have the following weight in determining course grades:


Date   Requirement                             Percent of Course Grade
Research Project:
2/6:   #1--Preliminary Statement of

           Research Interest                             ungraded
2/27:  #3--Preliminary Research Plan                            5
3/13:  #5--Survey of Secondary Works                           10
3/20:  #6--Survey of Primary Sources                           10
4/24:  #7--First Draft of Paper (3 copies)                      5
5/1-5/15:    Oral Presentation, Research Project                5
5/22:  #9--Revised (Final) Draft of Paper                      20
(Total, research project                                      (55)
Other Required Written Work:
2/13:  #2--Review of Hofstadter, ch. 1-3                        5
3/6:   #4--Comparative Review                                  15
4/17:  In-class Examination (history of History)               15
5/1-5/15: #8--Critique (oral & written, 3 copies)               5
Class Participation                                             5


Do not cut class just because you do not have a paper that is due; cutting
only compounds your problems.  Plagiarism is the presentation of another person'
s work as your own.  It may well be the most serious academic transgression 
possible; it will result in a course grade of F and will be reported to
the University disciplinary officer.


Office Hours and Related Information:
Office hours:  3:30-5:00 p.m., Mon. and Wed.; noon-1:45 p.m., Tue.
Office:  Psychology 411                 Office phone:  338-7561
E-mail:  cherny@sfsu.edu
Call me to arrange other times; if I'm not there, leave a message.  I'll probably 
call back during my office hours, so leave a number where you can be
reached at those times.  If you want to leave a written message for me, do not
put it under my office door; instead, take it to PSY 405, the history department 
office, and put in my mailbox.


Virtual Office-hours:  I usually check my e-mail every day and will usually
respond immediately.  Don't hesitate to write if you have a question or concern 
about class.


Recommended Reference Works:  You will want the following books in your personal 
library if you are serious about writing.

     William Strunk, Jr., and E.G. White, The Elements of Style.
     Kate L. Turabian, A Manual for Writers of Term Papers, Theses, and
 Dissertations.
     A good dictionary; I prefer the Oxford American Dictionary, but any good


 one will do.


Required Readings (available at the bookstore):

     Richard Hofstadter, The Age of Reform.
     Jules R. Benjamin, A Student's Guide to History.


Other required readings will be available in on reserve or in class.
Optional Readings (also at in the bookstore):

     Paul K. Conkin and Roland N. Stromberg, The Heritage and Challenge of
 History.


CLASS SCHEDULE

Note that all the reading assignments and most of the written assignments fall
before the middle of the semester, leaving the last half free for research and
writing on the term paper.  Keep up with the assigned reading, as we shall
follow this schedule very closely.


Jan. 30:  Introduction to the Study of History  Introductions; course overview
and course objectives; history as a field of study; the role of the historian.
FILM:  Indians, Outlaws, and Angie Debo


[This is a very good film for getting the students to talk immediately about
things as the historian's purpose in beginning a particular study, the use
of sources, and the historian's thesis.]


Planning a research project:  selecting a topic; exploring the secondary literature; 
developing a thesis question; locating appropriate primary sources.


Feb. 6: SUBMIT 1ST PAPER (prelim. statement of research interest)
Feb. 6:  Using the Internet in Historical Research  Introduction to e-mail,
INVESTIGATOR, GOPHER, MELVYL, CARL, America:  History and Life; meet in HSS
383.  If you have not yet done so, complete the library requirement.
REQUIRED READING:  Benjamin, chs. 1-4, appendix A


Jan. 31, Feb. 1, 6, 7, 8, 13, 14, 15:  Individual consultation with instructor
on research project:  Sign up in class on January 30 or February 6.


Feb. 13:  SUBMIT 2ND PAPER (review of Hofstadter, chs. 1-3)
Feb. 13:  Using an Archive  Tour of one of the archives in the area, location
and directions to be announced on February 6; archival research procedures.
TO DO:  Investigate libraries and archives relevant to your research project.


Feb. 27:  SUBMIT 3RD PAPER (preliminary research plan)
Feb. 27:  Interpreting the Past; Revising Past Interpretations  Identifying
the historian's thesis; evaluating the historian's evidence; revision as a
central part of historical analysis; example:  Hofstadter's Age of Reform,
chs. 1-3; other examples from major interpretations in American history.
REQUIRED READING:  Two articles, to be announced on Feb. 13.


Mar. 6:  SUBMIT 4TH PAPER (comparative review)
Mar. 6:  Evaluating and Using Primary Sources  Using documents, oral histories, 
statistics, and artifacts as sources; case studies.
REQUIRED READING:  Jerold S. Auerbach, "Woodrow Wilson's `Prediction' to Frank

     Cobb:  Words Historians Should Doubt Ever Got Spoken," Journal of Ameri-
     can History 54 (1967): 608-617--ON RESERVE.


Mar. 13:  SUBMIT 5TH PAPER (survey of secondary works)
Mar. 13:  Presenting Research Findings; Organizing written and oral
presentations of findings; when to quote, when to summarize; citing sources;
examples.
REQUIRED READING:  Benjamin, chapter 5; Turabian.


Mar. 20:  SUBMIT 6TH PAPER (survey of primary sources)
Mar. 20, 27, Apr. 3:  The History of History  The development of history as a
field of knowledge, from the ancient world to the present; relation of history
to the other social sciences.
REQUIRED READING:  examples from past historians, available in class
RECOMMENDED READING:  Conkin and Stromberg, Part I.


Apr. 17:  EXAMINATION on the history of History


Apr. 24:  SUBMIT 7TH PAPER (first draft of research paper)
Apr. 24:  Careers in History  What have SFSU graduates done with a history
major other than teach?  What should you be doing now to prepare for using
your history degree in a career?  Presentation by Suzanne Rubel of the Career
Center.


May 1:  SUBMIT 8TH PAPER (critique of two student papers)
May 1, 8, 15 (and perhaps May 22):  PRESENTATION AND CRITIQUE OF RESEARCH
FINDINGS

May 22:  SUBMIT 9TH PAPER (revised draft of research paper)


REQUIRED WRITTEN WORK

     All required papers should be done on a word-processor, double-spaced,
with one-inch margins on all sides.  (If you don't yet use a word-processor,
take one of the orientation courses in the first two weeks of the semester; if
this is a problem, discuss it with the instructor promptly.)  For this class,
staple each paper in the upper left-hand corner; do not put your paper in a
binder.  There is no need for a separate title page; instead, begin at the top
of the page with your name and the title of assignment.  Citations should be
footnotes, numbered consecutively from first to last; if your word-processing
program will not do footnotes, see me to discuss that situation.  Follow all
rules of citation in Turabian.  There should be no errors of grammar or spelling; 
word processors have a spelling checker, so use it.  Papers will be evaluated 
for both content and composition, and errors in form will be penalized;
review and apply what you learned in your required composition courses (English 
114 and 214 or equivalents).  For each paper, I have specified a minimum
and maximum length.  I doubt that you can do an adequate job in less space
than the minimum, but I'm willing to be persuaded; the maximum is intended to
restrain your enthusiasm and to keep the assignments in proportion.  If you go
beyond that limit, edit your work down to that maximum.  Always keep a copy of
any paper you submit to an instructor.


Late Papers:  Papers are late if they are not submitted on the day they are
due.  Papers that are missing at the end of the semester are graded as F.  If
I am not in my office, submit late papers in the history department office
(PSY 405) so they can be put into my mailbox; do not put late papers under the
door of my office.  All late papers will be penalized by reducing the grade by
one level (e.g., from A to A-) unless you present a written excuse based on a
medical, family, or work-related emergency.  Papers more than a week late may
be penalized further.


1ST PAPER (due Feb. 6 or earlier):  Preliminary description of research interest.  
What would you like to explore in your research project?  This will be
ungraded; its purpose is get you to focus your interest and let me to make
suggestions.  Length: 1-2 pages.


2ND PAPER (due Feb. 13):  Review of chapters 1-3 of Hofstadter's The Age of
Reform.  Identify the subject matter, thesis, evidence, and methodology.  The
title of this paper is Review.  The first item following the title should be a
complete bibliographic citation (see Turabian) of the book being reviewed.
For examples, look at the reviews in the American Historical Review (available
in the library or the history seminar room).  The purpose of this paper is for
you to practice identifying these elements in a historian's work.  Length:  2-
3 pages.  (5% of course grade)


[This paper, on the first 3 chapters of Hofstadter, counts virtually nothing
toward the final grade.  I require it as a means of making they read and think
carefully about those three chapters, because I then use those chapters as the
basis for a discussion on how to read a work by an historian--how to identify
the purpose, how to read footnotes and critique the use of sources, how to
identify the relation of a specific work to other works, and, most of all, how
to identify the author's thesis.  I also use this to warn the students about
the dangers of extending an interpretation beyond the point where the sources
permit, using the article by Collins on the supplementary reading at the end


3RD PAPER (due Feb. 27):  Present a preliminary research plan for your research 
project.  Indicate the topic you intend to explore; insofar as you know
at this point, present a brief summary of what historians have said about the
subject; indicate the question or questions you hope to answer by your research.  
Attach a preliminary bibliography.  The purpose of this paper is to
focus your research project and to produce drafts that may form part of your
introduction and bibliography.  Length:  1-2 pages not including bibliography.
(5% of course grade)


4TH PAPER (due Mar. 6):  This paper will be a comparative review, similar to
that by Ridge.  In this paper, you will compare Hofstadter's treatment of progressivism 
in The Age of Reform, chapters 4-5, with the treatment of urban
reform provided by Samuel P. Hays in "The Changing Political Structure of the
City in Industrial America."  Journal of Urban History 1 (1974): 6-38, which
is available on reserve.  Organize the heading as for the 2nd paper, but include 
full bibliographic citations for both items being reviewed.  In your
paper, summarize each author's thesis, consider their methodologies and evidence, 
and compare the two interpretations of political change in the early
20th century.  Length:  4-7 pages.  (15% of course grade)


5TH PAPER (due Mar. 13):  Use MELVYL to compile a list of five or more books
by historians that may be related to your topic.  Use America:  History and
Life or CARL to compile a list of five or more articles in scholarly journals
that may be related to your topic.  In your paper, first analyze one of the
works (preferably the one you think is most significant).  How does it address
your subject?  What evidence does it employ?  Is there a distinctive methodology
?  What is the author's thesis?  What questions does it raise for your research
?  Does it change your thinking about your research?  Second, present an
annotated bibliography of three or more secondary works (books or articles)
that you know are relevant to your research project.  Finally, attach the list
of five books and five articles; you may simply attach the print-out from your
computer.  Part of the purpose of this paper is to give you experience in conducting 
a literature search, to refine your research topic by examining the
work of previous historians, and, in the process, to draft more of your introduction 
and bibliography.  Length:  2-3 pages of analysis, 1-2 pages of bibliography, 
1 page list of books and articles. (10% of course grade)


6TH PAPER (due Mar. 20):  Survey some of the primary sources relevant to your
project and available in the Bay Area.  Treat one of these sources in some
depth, preferably the one you anticipate will be your most important primary
source (e.g., a manuscript collection, an autobiography, a newspaper).  You
may not have completed all your research into this source at this time, but
tell me what you have learned about it so far.  How reliable is it?  How comprehensive 
is it?  Does it seem likely to provide information that will permit
you to answer the questions you developed in the 3rd paper?  Does this source
raise questions for you that you will need to explore in other sources?  Include 
an annotated bibliography of all the primary sources that you have explored 
so far.  Part of the purpose of this paper is to focus your research
into primary sources and, in the process, to draft more of your bibliography.
Length:  2-3 pages of analysis, 1-2 pages of bibliography. (10% of course
grade)


EXAMINATION (Apr. 17):  This in-class examination will cover only the history
of history, based on the in-class readings, class lectures, and discussions.
It will be in two parts:  part I will provide seven or so items (people, quotations, 
works, concepts), of which you will select five to identify (one page
or so of a blue book per item); part II will provide two or more broadlyphrased 
essay topics, of which you will chose one as the basis for an essay.
(15% of course grade)


7TH PAPER (3 copies due on Apr. 24):  This is the penultimate written phase in
your research project--the first draft of your paper.  The paper must be based
largely on primary sources, and should include footnotes and a bibliography.
Organize your paper in the following sequence:  (1) introduction, in which you
indicate your topic (a refinement of your 3rd paper), introduce the conclusions 
of one or more historians on the topic (a refinement of your 5th paper),
and indicate the thesis question(s) you are exploring (based on your 3rd, 5th,
and 6th papers), all in about 2-3 pages; (2) analysis based on primary sources
(an expansion of your 6th paper), about 5-7 pages in length; (3) a summary of
your conclusions, briefly relating your analysis to your thesis question, to
the work of previous historians, and, perhaps, posing questions for future research, 
all in about 1 page; and (4) an annotated bibliography (based on your
5th and 6th papers), 1-2 pages.  (5% of course grade)


8TH PAPER (3 copies due on May 1):  See instructions below, for critiques.


9TH PAPER (due May 22 or sooner):  Revise your 7th paper in the light of the
critiques (mine and other students') and class discussion of it.  This paper
is optional; if you submit no revision by May 22 (or fail to make other arrangements 
for submitting it), the grade assigned to paper #7 will also be
recorded for #9 (and will account for 25% of your course grade).  Length:
please don't go over 12 pages plus 2 pages of bibliography.  When you submit
this paper, include with it your 7th paper.  (20% of course grade)


REQUIRED ORAL PRESENTATIONS

Oral presentation of information is used by historians almost as much as written 
forms.  At professional meetings, historians present th