


Policy File, Math Dept., CSULB


Department of Mathematics
California State University, Long Beach
Policy File
Table of Contents:
Jump: I (Voting) |
II (Committees) |
III (Positions)
| IV (Additional Policies)
. Math
Home Page | Policies
TOC | Math
Site TOC .

(Numbers after comma
in headings refers to the page number in the printed version.)
Article I: VOTING
POLICIES

1. Department Meetings, 1


1.1. Presiding Officer, 1
      1.2 Announcements of Meetings, 1
      1.3. Quorum at Department Meetings, 1
1.4 Conducting Business with No Quorum, 1
      1.5. Rules of Order at Department Meetings, 1



2. Eligibility to Vote, 1


2.1. General Eligibility, 1
      2.2. Staff Voting Rights, 1
2.3. Mailing of Ballots, 1



3. Mail Ballots, 1


3.1. Authorizing Mail Ballots, 1
      3.2. Ballot Form, 2
      3.3. Issuing Mail Ballots, 2
      3.4. Mandatory Mail Ballots, 2
      3.5. Pro and Con Arguments, 2
3.6. Time Allowed for Mail Ballots, 2
      3.7. Proxy Votes, 2
      3.8. Valid Ballots, 2
      3.9. Destruction of Ballots, 3



4. Meetings of Election Committee
Open, 3
5. Decision Rules, 3


5.1. Blank Ballots, 3
5.2. Votes Required for Passage, 3



6. Procedures for Elections,
3


6.1. Election of One Person, 3
6.2. Election of Two or More Persons, 3


Article II: COMMITTEES
( I II III
IV ) (top)

1. Appointed Committees, 4


1.1. Applied Math Committee,
      4
      1.2. Calculus Committee, 4
      1.3. Colloquium Committee, 4
      1.4. Curriculum Committee, 5 
      1.5. Education Committee, 5
1.6. Election Committee,
      5
      1.7. Graduate Committee, 6
      1.8. Scholarship Committee, 6
      1.9. Statistics-Probability Committee,
      6
      1.10 Computer Committee, 6



2. Elected Committees, 7


2.1. Executive Committee,
      7
      2.2. Grade Appeals Committee, 7
      2.3. RTP Committee, 8
2.4. Department Professional
      Leave Committee, 8
      2.5. Tenure-Track Search Committee, 8



Article III: POSITIONS
(top)


1. Course Directors, 9
      2. Curriculum Coordinator, 9
      3. Graduate Advisor, 9
      4. Library Representative, 10
      5. Math Education Coordinator- Credential 
. . Advising,
      10
6. Math Education Coordinator-
      Student 
. . Teachers/Interns,
      10
      7. Secretary of the Math Faculty, 11
      8. Undergraduate Advisor, 11
      9. Mathematics Education Resource Center
. . (MERC)
      Director, 11



Article IV: ADDITIONAL
POLICIES ( I II
III IV ) (top)


1. Assigned Time Policy,
      12
      2. Temporary Faculty Appointments, 12
      3. Credit/No Credit (CR/NC), 12
      4. Evaluation of Department Chair, 12
      5. Evaluation of Part-Time Faculty, 13
      6. Evaluation of Tenured Faculty - Post Tenure.Review (PTR), 13
      7. Final Examinations, 13
      8. Graduate Courses, 14
      9. Independent Study, 14
      10. Interpretation of Policy, 14
      11. Masters Comprehensive Examination, 14
      12. Masters Thesis Policies, 15
      13. Ratification by the Department of Curriculum
      Motions , 16
      14. Retreat Rights, 16
      15. Summaries of Student Evaluations/Grades,
      p16
16. Summer Session and Winter
      Session Assignments, 17
      17. Syllabus Policy, 17
      18. Tenure-Track Appointments, 17
      19. Withdrawal Policy, 18
      20. Due Process Policy for Situations Involving.Academic Judgments
      not Resulting in a Final.Grade, 18
      21. Class Meetings, 18
      22. Textbook Selection, 18
      23. Student-Teacher Evaluations, 19
      24. Funding of Faculty Travel, 19
      25. Restriction on Class Size Beyond Enrollment
      Limit., 19
      26. Retention, Tenure, and Promotion (RTP) Policy., 19
      27. Faculty on FERP or PRTB, 19



. Top |
I. Voting | II. Committees |
III. Positions |
IV. Additional Policies |
End .
Article I: VOTING POLICIES
1. Department Meetings (top)
1.1. Presiding Officer
The Presiding Officer at Department Meetings shall be the Department
Chair or the Chair's designee.
1.2 Announcements of Meetings
A department meeting, including its agenda, must be announced
at least three (3) working days in advance.
1.3. Quorum at Department Meetings
A quorum at a Department meeting shall consist of a majority
of the tenured and probationary faculty members of the Department
who have full-time assignments in the Department at the time of
the meeting. All faculty members of the department who are eligible
to vote (as defined in section 2) and present at the meeting shall
be counted toward a quorum.
1.4 Conducting Business with No Quorum
In the absence of a quorum, but with the Presiding Officer
and at least five (5) other voting members present, the following
business may be conducted:
a. Minutes of previous meetings may be corrected and/or approved;
b. A motion may be made on any issue that was on a previously
distributed agenda for that meeting. Such a motion may be made
and amended, but the main motion may only be voted on by mail
ballot. A majority vote of the eligible voters present is required
to authorize the ballot; 
c. Nominations may be made and/or closed for any department or
College position or committee.
1.5. Rules of Order at Department Meetings
Department meetings shall be conducted in accordance with Robert's
Rules of Order Newly Revised, except where Department policy specifies
otherwise.
2. Eligibility to Vote (top)
2.1. General Eligibility
The voting membership of the Department on all matters to be
decided at a Department meeting or by a mail ballot, except those
specified by Department, College, University, or Collective Bargaining
policy, shall consist of tenured and probationary faculty who
have at least a half-time assignment in the Mathematics Department
(including assigned time and student teacher supervision) and
Mathematics Department faculty members who are on Pre-retirement
Reduction in Time-Base (PRTB) or on the Faculty Early Retirement
Program (FERP).
2.2. Staff Voting Rights
Permanent or probationary staff are allowed to vote on all
questions relating to physical plant and equipment, in particular
Department offices, office equipment, and the buildings in which
the Department is housed. Full- and part-time staff vote equally.
2.3. Mailing of Ballots
All ballots will be mailed to the home or forwarding address
of eligible faculty who are on leave, unless they have made prior
written request not to be provided ballots.
3. Mail Ballots (top)
3.1. Authorizing Mail Ballots
3.1.1. Department Meetings
a. If a quorum is present, then for any main motion on the
floor a mail ballot may be authorized by a majority vote of those
eligible to vote on that issue who are present and voting; 
b. If a quorum is not present at a properly announced department
meeting, a mail ballot may be authorized by those present in accordance
with 1.4 (b) above.
3.1.2. Authorization by Policy
A mail ballot that is authorized by any Department policy shall
be considered authorized by the Department.
3.1.3 Curriculum Committee and Graduate Committee Motions
For any motion that is passed by the Curriculum Committee or
the Graduate Committee and that requires a mandatory mail ballot
as defined in 3.4, a mail ballot shall be considered authorized
by the Department.
3.1.4. Executive Committee
A mail ballot may be authorized on a given issue by a two-thirds
vote of the Executive Committee, provided the issue was on a previously
distributed agenda for the meeting at which the issue is to be
considered.
3.1.5. Petition by Faculty
A mail ballot shall be authorized upon receipt by the Department
Chair of a petition signed by at least 20% of the tenure-track
faculty who are eligible to vote on that issue, provided the petition
contains a full statement of the ballot motion. A petition cannot
be used to authorize a mail ballot on the same or equivalent motion,
or part thereof, previously decided by the Department at a Department
meeting or by mail ballot in the same academic year.
3.1.6. Unauthorized Ballots
A ballot that has not been authorized according to one of the
above sections shall be null and void.
3.2. Ballot Form
In this document, a "ballot item" shall mean any
one motion or one election to a position(s) on a single committee,
or to a single office. A ballot sheet may contain more than one
ballot item.
a. Each ballot item for an election shall include spaces for a
number of write-in candidates equal to the number of positions
to be filled; 
b. In ballot items involving alternatives, such as alternative
actions or candidates for position(s) on a committee or council,
the choice of "None of the above;" must be included
as the last choice of the ballot item. This requirement does not
apply to "Yes-No" or "Approve-Disapprove"
types of ballot items; 
c. The decision rule for each ballot item shall be stated on the
ballot; 
d. The ballot shall include a statement of the date and time when
the ballot is due. 
A ballot that does not meet all of the above requirements shall
be null and void.
3.3. Issuing Mail Ballots 
a. All mail ballots shall be issued in a timely manner by the
Secretary of the Math Faculty, or in the Secretary's absence by
the Department Chair or the Chair's designee; 
b. When an election is to be held or a motion is to be voted on
by mail ballot, ballots shall be distributed to mailboxes of eligible
voters in the department office. For those faculty members on
leave or Early Retirement ballots shall be mailed to their home
or leave address.
3.4. Mandatory Mail Ballots
The following matters must be decided by the method of issuing
a mail ballot to all eligible voters:

a. elections to all standing elected Department committees
  or offices;
  b. motions that substantially affect the requirements of any
  degree or option thereunder that is offered by the Department;

  c. all motions regarding policies or issues that affect the reappointment,
  tenure, promotion, salary, facilities, other monetary benefits,
  or honors of the faculty; 
  d. any main motion that requires other than a majority of the
  votes cast for passage.

3.5. Pro and Con Arguments
For each mail ballot item, eligible voters, including those
on leave or Early Retirement, shall be given notice and opportunity
to have their written pro and con arguments attached to the ballot
when distributed. Such arguments must be submitted in final form
ready for distribution within five (5) working days of the notice.
This requirement does not apply to elections to committees or
College Council or approval of Department positions.
3.6. Time Allowed for Mail Ballots
The due date for a mail ballot shall be at least seven (7)
calendar days from the date of its issuance.
3.7. Proxy Votes
Proxy votes will not be allowed.
3.8. Valid Ballots
For a ballot to be valid, the ballot envelope must be signed
by the voter and delivered to the Department ballot box or received
by the Department by the due date and time. If there are two (or
more) ballot envelopes by the same voter in the same election
and/or on the same motion, neither (none) of these ballots shall
be counted unless there is clear indication on the ballot envelope
which one is to be counted.
3.9. Destruction of Ballots
All ballots cast in a departmental vote or election shall be
retained by the Secretary of the Math Faculty for thirty (30)
working days after the results of the election have been announced
and may be destroyed thereafter.
4. Meetings of Election Committee Open (top)
Election Committee meetings, including those at which votes
are counted, shall be open to all eligible voters.
5. Decision Rules (top)
5.1. Blank Ballots
A blank ballot item (as defined in 3.2) will not be counted
as a vote cast on that issue or in that election.
5.2. Votes Required for Passage

a. The requirement for passage of any mail ballot issue or
  any election to any position is a majority of the votes cast
  by eligible voters unless a Department, College, University,
  or Collective Bargaining policy provides otherwise; 
  b. A majority of the votes cast is required for passage of ballot
  motions regarding policies or issues which affect the reappointment,
  tenure;, promotion, salary, facilities, other monetary benefits,
  or honors of the faculty; 
  c. A voting rule other than "majority of the votes cast"
  may be imposed on any substantive motion requiring an affirmative-negative
  vote or equivalent wording (as opposed to a choice among alternatives)
  by a two-thirds vote of the eligible voters present and voting
  at a Department meeting at which a quorum is present; 
  d. This Policy File may be amended by a majority of the votes
  cast.

6. Procedures for Elections (top)
Except where otherwise specified by a higher authority, departmental
elections to committees or positions shall be subject to the following
procedures:
6.1. Election of One Person

a. The candidate receiving the highest number of votes shall
  be elected unless that candidate fails to receive a majority
  of the votes cast or is tied with another candidate; 
  b. If there is only one candidate and that candidate fails to
  receive a majority, a second ballot shall be issued bearing that
  candidate's name; if the candidate again fails to receive a majority,
  the Department Chair shall reopen nominations; 
  c. If there are at least two candidates and no candidate receives
  a majority or there is a tie, there shall be a run-off election
  between the top two candidates, or among all candidates tied
  for first if there are more than two. If no candidate is elected
  after the first run-off election, then a second run-off election
  will be held following the same procedure. If after two run-off
  ballots no candidate is elected, then the Department Chair shall
  reopen nominations for that position.

6.2. Election of Two or More Persons

a. When two or more people are to be elected to the same
  office, those candidates who receive the highest number of votes
  and who receive a majority of the votes cast shall be elected.
  In the event that not all vacancies are filled on the first ballot
  (because of failure to receive a majority or because of a tie
  vote), there shall be a run-off election among the candidates
  who receive the next highest number of votes on the original
  ballot. If there are more candidates (excluding those already
  elected) than positions to be filled after the first ballot,
  the number of candidates in the run-off election shall be one
  greater than the number of positions remaining to be filled (except
  that, if two or more candidates are tied for the last place on
  the run-off ballot, they shall all be included). Otherwise the
  run-off shall include all candidates who were not already elected.
  If not all positions are filled after the first run-off election,
  then a second run-off election will be held following the same
  procedure;
  b. If, after two run-off ballots, there still remain unfilled
  position(s), then the Department Chair shall reopen nominations
  for those positions.

. Top | I. Voting |
II. Committees |
III. Positions |
IV. Additional Policies |
End .
Article II: COMMITTEES
1. Appointed Committees (top)
All appointments to the following committees shall be for one
academic year, and shall be made during the preceding Spring Semester
after the election of all elected committees. All committee appointments
by the Department Chair shall be subject to approval by the (current)
Executive Committee. If a new chair is taking office in the fall
semester for which appointments are being made, then all of the
appointments by the Chair are to be made by the Chair-designate
if on duty during the spring semester in question, otherwise by
the current, outgoing Chair.
1.1. Applied Math Committee (top)
1. Membership. Five to seven full-time faculty members appointed
by the Department Chair. The Committee will elect a Chair from
among its members.
2. Duties and Functions.

a. Recommends texts and maintains updated department course
  outlines for Math 370A and 370B; 
  b. Recommends texts for other applied math courses as required;

  c. Makes recommendations to the Curriculum Committee or Graduate
  Committee regarding courses devoted largely to applied mathematics;

  d. Considers and makes recommendations to the Curriculum Committee
  concerning changes in the Applied Math Option and the Minor in
  Applied Math and to the Graduate Committee concerning changes
  in the Masters Option in Applied Math; 
  e. Provides liaison with departments that are served by courses
  in applied mathematics.

1.2. Calculus Committee (top)
1. Membership. The Committee shall consist of three to seven
tenure-track faculty members. If there are fewer than three volunteers
for the Committee in any academic year, then the Committee will
not be formed for that year. Any tenure-track faculty member who
requests to serve shall be appointed to this Committee, except
that if more than 7 members wish to serve, then 7 members will
be selected at random from those wishing to serve. The Committee
shall elect a Chair from among its members.
2. Duties and Functions.

a. Recommend to the Curriculum Committee changes in the content
  of Math 122, 123, and 224; 
  b. Maintain updated department course outlines for Math 122,
  123, and 224;
  c. Review the current text(s) for Math 122, 123, and 224 at least
  once each academic year in order to inform the faculty of errors,
  omissions etc. and of any suggested changes in emphasis; 
  d. As required, prepare the course packet for the General Education
  Governing Committee's (GEGC) review of the courses MATH 122 and
  MATH 123 for GE recertification and submit the packet to the
  department Curriculum Committee.
  e. Upon the signed petition of at least 12 full-time faculty
  members of the Department, review texts for Math 122, 123, and
  224 for possible future adoption;
  
i. The Committee shall carefully review at least five
    texts including the currently adopted text;
    ii. Following this review, the Committee shall select
    a text to be used for all sections of Math 122 in the first regular
    semester following the selection, all sections of Math 122 and
    123 in the next semester or Summer Session, and all sections
    of 122, 123, and 224 in the subsequent semester or Summer Session.
    It also shall be used for all sections of 122, 123, and 224 until
    a different text is adopted by this method;
    iii. The Calculus Committee text selection will be
    put to a vote of those tenure-track faculty who have taught Math
    122, 123 or 224 at least once in the last five years (including
    Summer Session) or who are scheduled to teach Math 122, 123 or
    224 in the following semester or Summer Session. The ballot choice
    shall be the Committee text selection and the current text.
  

1.3. Colloquium Committee (top)
1. Membership. Three full-time faculty members appointed by
the Department Chair. The Committee shall elect a Chair from among
its members.
2. Duties and Functions.

a. Contacts faculty at CSULB and at other universities and
  colleges to arrange for speakers for colloquium talks; 
  b. Prepares the schedule of colloquium speakers; 
  c. Coordinates with other departments concerning joint colloquia;

  d. Makes recommendations to the Department Chair concerning the
  allocation of honorarium funds for colloquium speakers.

1.4. Curriculum Committee (top)
1. Membership. The Curriculum Coordinator, if that position
has been filled, and five additional tenure-track faculty members
appointed by the Department Chair and one non-voting student member
selected by the Mathematics Student Association. The Curriculum
Coordinator shall serve as chair. If the Curriculum Coordinator
position has not been filled for an academic year or semester,
the Committee shall elect a Chair from among its appointed members.
No faculty member except the Curriculum Coordinator may serve
more than three academic years consecutively.
2. Duties and Functions. Considers and makes recommendations
to the Department concerning all aspects of the undergraduate
program, such as:

a. new courses;
  b. deletions of or changes in existing courses;
  c. degree requirements;
  d. options and new degrees;
  e. catalog changes; 
  f. other matters referred to the Committee by the Department
  or Department Chair.

3. Agendas and Minutes.

a. The Committee Chair will prepare and circulate agendas
  of all meetings to all full-time faculty; 
  b. The Committee will elect a Secretary from among its members.
  The Secretary will prepare minutes of all meetings and distribute
  them to all full-time faculty.

4. Subcommittees. The Committee may form ad hoc subcommittees
for any special purpose. Members of the ad hoc subcommittee may
be drawn from among the full-time members of the mathematics faculty.
The ad hoc subcommittees report their recommendations directly
to the Curriculum Committee.
1.5. Education Committee (top)
1. Membership. The Math Education Coordinators- Credential
Advising and Student Teacher/Interns, if the position(s) has (have)
been filled, and three to five additional members appointed by
the Department Chair. The Committee shall elect a Chair from among
its members.
2. Duties and Functions.

a. Recommends texts and maintains updated department course
  outlines for Math 110 and 111; 
  b. Recommends texts and maintains updated department course outlines
  for other mathematics education courses as required; 
  c. Makes recommendations to the Curriculum Committee or Graduate
  Committee regarding courses devoted largely to mathematics education;

  d. Considers and makes recommendations to the Curriculum Committee
  concerning changes in the Mathematics Education Option; 
  e. Evaluates applicants for student teaching and recommends their
  acceptance or rejection.

1.6. Election Committee (top)
1. Membership. The Secretary of the Math Faculty and two additional
full-time faculty members appointed by the Department Chair. The
Secretary of the Math Faculty shall serve as Chair of the committee.
The Department Chair may appoint a temporary alternate member
in the absence of at least two regular members for a ballot that
must be counted immediately.
2. Duties and Functions.

a. Counts all ballots authorized by the Department; 
  b. Reports the count of the ballots, declares the outcome in
  accordance with existing Department voting policy and certifies
  the results of the election to the full-time faculty of the Department
  by issuing a formal memorandum which shall state for each issue
  or election:
    i. the number of votes cast; 
    ii. the number of votes cast for each candidate or
  alternative on the ballot; 
    iii. the decision rule applied and the number of
  votes required to pass or be elected; 
    iv. the number of invalid ballots (including blank
  ballot items) and the reason each was not valid; and
    v. the outcome of the ballot, except as in 2(e).
  c. The Committee Chair retains all ballots cast for thirty
  (30) working days, excluding Summer Session, after the results
  are announced (in accordance with Article I, section 3.9);
  d. If the decision rule stated on a ballot issued by the
  Secretary of the Math Faculty is challenged by any eligible voter
  in writing to the Department Chair before the due date of the
  ballot, the ballots shall not be counted until the challenge
  has been resolved by the Executive Committee, with the Department
  Chair voting only in case of a tie among the members who vote;
  the majority decision shall be final and binding. No challenge
  of a decision rule may be made after the votes have been counted;
  e. If there is a question by the Committee in deciding the
  outcome of a ballot, pursuant to 2(b), it may by majority vote
  refer the question to the Executive Committee. In that case,
  the outcome of the ballot shall be decided by majority of the
  votes cast by Executive Committee members, with the Department
  Chair voting only in case of a tie.

1.7. Graduate Committee (top)
1. Membership. The Graduate Advisor, if that position has been
filled, and three to six additional tenure-track faculty members
appointed by the Department Chair with the approval of the Executive
Committee. The Graduate Advisor will serve as Chair of the Committee.
If the Graduate Advisor position has not been filled for an academic
year or semester, the Committee shall elect a Chair from among
its appointed members. No faculty member except the Graduate Advisor
may serve more than three academic years consecutively.
2. Duties and Functions. Considers and makes recommendations
to the Department concerning all aspects of the graduate program,
such as:

a. new courses; 
  b. deletions of or changes in existing courses; 
  c. degree requirements; 
  d. options and new degrees; 
  e. catalog changes; 
  f. approval of thesis proposals; 
  g. applicability of undergraduate courses to graduate degrees;

  h. other matters referred to the Committee by the Department
  or the Department Chair.

3. Agendas and Minutes.

a. The Committee Chair will prepare and circulate agendas
  of all meetings to all full-time faculty; 
  b. The Committee will elect a Secretary from among its members.
  The Secretary will prepare minutes of all meetings and distribute
  them to all full-time faculty.

1.8. Scholarship Committee (top)
1. Membership. Three full-time tenured or probationary faculty
members appointed by the Department Chair. The Committee shall
elect a Chair from among its members.
2. Duties and Functions.

a. Solicit, screen and evaluate applicants for the Mary Smoke
  Memorial Scholarship and any other scholarships to be awarded
  by the Mathematics Department.
  b. Determine the recipients of all scholarships referred to in
  (a).
  c. Recommend students to be recognized as the outstanding BS
  and MS department graduates for the academic year.
  d. Advise the Department Chair on all matters related to scholarship
  and other awards to students.

1.9. Statistics-Probability (top)
1. Membership. Three to five full-time faculty members appointed
by the Department Chair. The Committee shall elect a Chair from
among its members.
2. Duties and Functions.

a. Recommends texts and maintains updated department course
  outlines for Math 180, 380, 381, and 382; 
  b. Recommends texts and maintains updated department course outlines
  for other probability and statistics courses as required; 
  c. Makes recommendations to the Curriculum Committee or Graduate
  Committee concerning courses devoted largely to probability and/or
  statistics; 
  d. Considers and makes recommendations to the Curriculum Committee
  concerning changes in the Option in Statistics.

1.10. Computer Committee (top)
1. Membership. Three to six faculty members appointed by the
Department Chair. The Committee shall elect a Chair from among
its members.
2. Duties and Functions.

a. Advise the Department Chair on purchases of hardware and
  software needed for department computer labs.
  b. Make recommendations to the appropriate committees on proposals
  for incorporation of computers into the department curriculum.
  c. Review requests from faculty for individual computer equipment
  and software and make recommendations to the Department Chair
  concerning purchase by the department.

2. Elected Committees (top)
The following committees shall be elected before the end of
the spring semester preceding the academic year in which they
will function. Except for the Executive Committee, the members
shall be elected for one-year terms.
2.1. Executive Committee (top)
1. Membership. The Department Chair and five additional members
elected from among the tenured faculty for staggered two-year
terms. The Department Chair shall serve as Committee Chair.
2. Calling Meetings. Meetings of the Committee may be called
by the Department Chair. A meeting must be called if requested
by a written petition of any three of the elected members.
3. Duties and Functions.

a. Makes all decisions concerning:
  
i. all matters pertaining to the hiring of full-time
    faculty, except appointment with tenure, including but not limited
    to approved probationary tenure-track positions and temporary
    full-time positions (see "Tenure-Track Appointments"
    in Article IV); 
ii. non-reimbursed (by faculty allocation) assigned time
    proposals, except those for established Department positions;
    and 
iii. other matters that the Department refers to the committee.
  
b. Decides challenges to the decision rule and outcomes of
  ballots whenever such questions are referred to the Committee
  by the Election Committee, pursuant to Sections 1.6.2. d and
  e.
  c. Elects the Secretary of the Math Faculty in the Spring
  preceding the academic year of service from among the tenure-track
  members of the department;
  d. Prepares a Department Chair evaluation form, distributes
  it to the full-time faculty of the department, and collects the
  completed forms and gives them to the Department Chair in accordance
  with the policy, Evaluation of Department Chair, Article IV;
  e. Interprets Department policy in accordance with Article
  IV, Interpretation of Policy;
  f. Advises the Department Chair on other matters that he/she
  refers to the Committee.

4. Agendas and Minutes.

a. The Department Chair will prepare and circulate agendas
  of all meetings (except meetings devoted exclusively to faculty
  hiring) to all full-time members of the Department;
  b. The Committee will elect a Secretary from among its members.
  The Secretary will prepare minutes of all meetings and distribute
  them to all full-time faculty.

5. Executive Sessions. The Executive Committee may hold all
or part of an announced meeting in executive session, in which
only members of the committee and invited guests shall be present,
provided the following three conditions are met:

i. the issues to be discussed were on the agenda of the meeting;
  ii. members of the department are given reasonable opportunity
  to express their opinion on the issues before any final action
  is taken; 
  iii. a majority of the committee members agree that the issues
  are of a sensitive nature requiring confidentiality.


The minutes of the Executive Committee shall include the issues
  discussed during the executive session and the actions taken,
  but need not reveal confidential discussion or exact voting results.
2.2. Grade Appeals Committee (top)
1. Membership. Four members elected from the tenured faculty,
not including the Department Chair, and one undergraduate student
member selected by the Mathematics Student Association. The Committee
shall elect a chair from among its faculty members.
2. Replacement of Committee Members.

a. If there are peremptory challenges of one or more faculty
  members of the Committee, or if the instructor in the grade appeal
  is a member of the Committee, then the Department Chair shall
  appoint replacements for those members, to serve only for that
  grade appeal.
  b. If there is a peremptory challenge of the student member of
  the Committee, then the Department Chair shall request the Mathematics
  Student Association to appoint a replacement for the student
  member for that grade appeal.

3. Duties and Functions. Considers formal grade appeals in
accordance with the policies and procedures established by the
College and the University.
2.3. RTP Committee (top)
1. Membership and Eligibility.

a. The RTP Committee shall consist of at least three (3)
  but no more than four (4) tenured faculty holding the rank of
  Professor. A majority of the votes cast by the tenured and probationary
  faculty of the Department is required for election; 
  b. If the Mathematics Department is unable to elect a full RTP
  Committee, additional members from outside the Mathematics Department
  shall be elected in accordance with the College RTP document;

  c. If a member cannot complete his/her term, and the Committee
  size falls below three (3), then the Department will promptly
  elect a replacement.

2. Duties and Functions.

a. The Mathematics Department RTP Committee shall be responsible
  for such reviews and recommendations as may be required by College
  and University policy, for
  
i. probationary faculty; 
    ii. temporary full-time faculty (Lecturers); and 
    iii. candidates for tenure and promotion.
In making recommendations regarding retention, tenure, and
    promotion, the Department RTP Committee shall act in accordance
    with the Mathematics Department RTP Policy (Article IV, Section
    26).
     
  
b. Makes recommendation regarding Retreat Rights and Retreat
  Rights with tenure in the Department of Mathematics for persons
  appointed to administrative positions;

2.4. Department Professional Leave Committee
(top)
1. Membership. Three tenured faculty elected by the probationary
and tenured faculty of the department. Faculty applying for a
difference-in-pay leave shall not serve on this committee.
2. Duties and Functions. Pursuant to provisions of the M.O.U.
and the University Sabbatical Leave Policy, review difference-in-pay
leave requests, evaluate the difference-in-pay leave applications
submitted, and forward its recommendations to the College Dean.
(The committee's review shall consider questions related to the
quality of the proposed difference-in-pay leave.)
2.5 Tenure-Track Search Committee (top)
1. Membership. Following the decision to seek a tenure-track
position, an ad hoc Search Committee shall be formed to conduct
the required search for that position. The Committee shall consist
of five (5) tenured faculty. The Executive Committee shall appoint
two (2) members knowledgeable in the specialty of the position
being sought. The remaining three (3) members shall then be elected
by the department. The Search Committee shall elect a chair from
among its members.
2. Role of the Department Chair. If not an elected or appointed
member of a search committee, the Department Chair may choose
to be an ex officio, non-voting member of that search committee.
3. Duties and Functions.

a. Prepare the Position Description which is to be submitted
  with the position request.
  b. Prepare the Recruitment and Advertising Plan and submit it,
  via the Dean, to the Office of Affirmative Action.
  c. Prepare the Description of Screening and Selection Process
  and submit it, via the Dean, to the Office of Academic Personnel.
  d. Advertise the position in the appropriate venues and oversee
  the receipt and filing of all application materials.
  e. Screen all applicants and determine the pool of finalists.
  Invite finalists for campus visits and conduct formal interviews.
  f. Arrange informal meetings with the candidates which are open
  to all department faculty.
  g. After soliciting input from all department faculty, recommend
  a ranking of the finalists to the Dean.

4. If a Search Committee of five members cannot be formed for
a particular tenure-track position, the Department Chair shall
suspend the search for that position.
. Top | I. Voting |
II. Committees |
III. Positions |
IV. Additional Policies |
End .
Article III: POSITIONS
Appointments for the following positions shall be made during
the preceding Spring Semester. If a new chair is taking office
in the fall semester for which appointments are being made, then
all of the appointments by the Chair shall be made by the Chair-designate
if on duty during the spring semester in question, otherwise by
the current, outgoing Chair. The terms of office shall be for
one year.
Prior to making the appointments to positions for which assigned
time is authorized, the Department Chair shall determine the total
number of units of assigned time that will be available and, with
the approval of the Executive Committee, the number of units (if
any) and the distribution by semester for each position. In case
the total number of units of assigned time is inadequate to support
all positions, the Department Chair, with the approval of the
Executive Committee, will determine which assigned-time positions
will be filled and which will be left vacant.
1. Course Directors (top)
1. Method of Appointment. The Department Chair shall appoint
a Course Director for each of the lower division courses:

Math 001, 010, 101, 103, 112, 114, 115, 117, 119A, 119B, 120,
  233, and 247.
2. Duties and Functions.

a. Selecting a text and writing a course outline for the
  selected text consistent with the catalog description of the
  course and with the content, level, and emphasis of the course
  intended by the department. The course outline will specify the
  sections in the text to be covered, the order in which they should
  be covered, an approximate timeline for the course, and other
  advice deemed appropriate. The selected text and adherence to
  the course outline will be recommended for full-time faculty
  teaching the course and required for part-time faculty teaching
  the course;
  b. Writing a standard course outline (independent of a specific
  text) consistent with the catalog description of the course and
  with the content, level, and emphasis of the course intended
  by the department;
  c. As required, prepare the course packet for the General
  Education Governing Committee's (GEGC) review of the course for
  GE re-certification and submit the packet to the department Curriculum
  Committee.
  d. Conferring with departments using the course and communicating
  recommendations received from concerned departments to the Mathematics
  Department Chair and/or the Curriculum Committee;
  e. Articulating with other colleges and universities to determine
  which courses would be acceptable for transfer credit as equivalent
  courses.
   
  Questions concerning the course outlines and/or the text
  selections may be referred to the Curriculum Committee by the
  Department Chair.

2. Curriculum Coordinator (top)
1. Method of Appointment. The Department Chair shall appoint
a tenure-track faculty member as candidate for Curriculum Coordinator.
2. Duties and Functions.

a. Serves as Chair of the Department Curriculum Committee:
  schedules, prepares agendas for and presides over meetings and
  maintains records of committee actions;
  b. Advises the Department Chair concerning class scheduling:
  the number of sections, time and day distribution, frequency
  of offering, etc., with reference to curricular requirements;
  c. Solicits faculty teaching preferences and, in consultation
  with the Department Chair, assigns faculty to classes;
  d. Assists the Department Chair, as required, in revising
  schedules and reassigning faculty during and after VRR and enrollment
  periods for special sessions;
  e. Maintains records of enrollments and faculty assignments;
  f. Assists the Department Chair, as required, in proofreading
  catalog and bulletin materials to maintain accuracy.

3. Assigned Time. This position may be supported by assigned
time if recommended by the Department Chair and approved by the
Executive Committee.
3. Graduate Advisor (top)
1. Method of Appointment. The Department Chair shall appoint
a tenure-track faculty member as candidate for Graduate Advisor.
2. Duties and Functions.

a. Advise all candidates for the Masters degree in Mathematics
  concerning degree requirements, including prerequisites, course
  requirements, advancement to candidacy, and thesis or comprehensive
  examination. Maintain at least three scheduled office hours per
  week at times convenient to students for this purpose in addition
  to normally scheduled hours;
  b. At least once each semester, review graduate student files
  and monitor their degree progress, correspond with students as
  necessary to insure their progress;
  c. Review and approve graduate student's programs and recommend
  their advancement to candidacy when they are eligible;
  d. Advise the Department Chair on the selection of Teaching
  Assistants and Graduate Assistants;
  e. Schedule and supervise the administration of the graduate
  comprehensive examinations;
  f. Supervise and assist in the evaluation of Teaching Assistants;
  g. Serve as chair of the Graduate Committee;
  h. Assist the Department Chair with other matters relating
  to the graduate program as required;
  i. Maintain records relating to the duties of this position
  as a guide to subsequent appointees;
  j. Notify all instructors of graduate courses covered by
  the policy, Graduate Courses, in Article IV, of the requirements
  of that policy, prior to the first day of instruction of each
  semester.

3. Assigned Time. This position may be supported by assigned
time if recommended by the Department Chair and approved by the
Executive Committee.
4. Library Representative (top)
1. Method of Appointment. The Department Chair shall appoint
a tenure-track faculty member as Library Representative.
2. Duties and Functions. Recommends purchase of mathematics
books, periodicals and audio-visual materials for the Library.
In performing this function, the Library Representative:

a. works with the Library staff as needed;
  b. solicits recommendations from the Math Department faculty;
  c. maintains the Mathematics Department library files.

5. Math Education Coordinator- Credential
Advising (top)
1. Method of Appointment. The Department Chair shall appoint
a candidate for Math Education Coordinator- Credential Advising.
2. Duties and Functions.

a. Serve as Major Advisor to all mathematics majors and minors
  who are candidates for the secondary credential, giving academic
  advice and advice on state laws concerning credential requirements;
  maintain at least three scheduled office hours per week at times
  convenient to students for this purpose, in addition to normally
  scheduled hours;
  b. Process applications for admissions to the Credential
  program;
  c. Serve as Advisor for the Fifth Year Credential Program;
  d. Serve as Advisor for Liberal Studies students for those
  seeking a Mathematics concentration;
  e. Serve as Advisor for students seeking Single Subject or
  Multiple Subject Supplementary Authorization;
  f. Evaluate transcripts of students seeking a single subject
  credential in mathematics;
  g. Assist students and recent graduates in obtaining teaching
  positions;
  h. Assist local school districts in obtaining mathematics
  teacher aides;
  i. Maintain a general record of procedures, deadlines, requirements
  contact persons, etc. related to the duties of this position
  as a guide to subsequent appointees.

3. Assigned Time. This position may be supported by assigned
time if recommended by the Department Chair and approved by the
Executive Committee.
6. Math Education Coordinator- Student
Teachers/Interns (top)
1. Method of Appointment. The Department Chair shall appoint
a candidate for Math Education Coordinator- Student Teachers/Interns.
2. Duties and Functions.

a. Evaluate transcripts and process applications for admissions
  to teaching and internship program;
  b. Select and contact school districts, and schools to place
  student teachers;
  c. Assign student teachers to school districts;
  d. Select qualified university supervisors in consultation
  with the Department Chair. Maintain updated lists of the above
  personnel;
  e. Assign university supervisors to student teachers and
  interns;
  f. Confer with master teachers and administrators in the
  schools and with university supervisors as required;
  g. Coordinate distribution of information and forms for student
  teachers, interns, university supervisors and master teachers;
  h. Arrange and teach seminars for student teachers and interns;
  i. Assist students and recent graduates in obtaining teacher
  positions;
  j. Maintain a general record of procedures, deadlines, requirements
  contact persons, etc. related to the duties of this position
  as a guide to subsequent appointees.

3. Assigned Time. This position may be supported by assigned
time if recommended by the Department Chair and approved by the
Executive Committee.
7. Secretary of the Math Faculty (top)
1. Method of Appointment. The Executive Committee shall elect
a Secretary of the Math Faculty during the spring semester preceding
the academic year of the appointment from among the tenure-track
members of the Department. The term of office is one year.
2. Duties and Functions.

a. Prepare and distribute the minutes of Department meetings,
  including the list of all members present to all full-time faculty;
  b. Prepare and distribute to eligible faculty all ballots
  authorized by the Department;
  c. Notify the appropriate committee chair of motions referred
  to that committee by the Department.

In the absence of the Secretary of the Mathematics Faculty
at a Department meeting, the Department Chair (or designee chairing
the meeting) shall appoint a secretary pro tem, who shall assume
all of the above duties for that meeting.
8. Undergraduate Advisor (top)
1. Method of Appointment. The Department Chair shall appoint
a tenure-track faculty member as candidate for Undergraduate Advisor.
2. Duties and Functions.

a. Coordinate the Department's undergraduate advising program;
  b. Maintain a file of all relevant requirements and procedures
  and be prepared to answer questions concerning this information,
  serving as a resource for the entire Department;
  c. Maintain at least three scheduled office hours per week
  at times convenient to students for this purpose, in addition
  to normally scheduled hours;
  d. Maintain current articulation agreements with community
  colleges;
  e. Keep an up-to-date information brochure available for
  students;
  f. Contact Math majors as needed to inform them that they
  must meet with their advisors to file an approved program;
  g. Help keep advisors up-to-date on all current advising
  information.

The Undergraduate Advisor will maintain a general record of
procedures, deadlines, requirements, contact persons, etc., related
to the duties of this position. This record will serve as a guide
to subsequent appointees.
3. Assigned Time. This position may be supported by assigned
time if recommended by the Department Chair and approved by the
Executive Committee.
9. Mathematics Education Resource Center
(MERC) Director (top)
1. Method of Appointment. The Department Chair shall appoint
a tenure-track faculty member as candidate for Mathematics Education
Resource Center Director.
2. Duties and Functions.

a. Schedule the operating hours of the MERC and maintain
  a complete log of all persons who use the MERC facilities;
  b. Recruit, select, schedule, supervise, and attend to payroll-related
  tasks for all MERC Student Lab Assistants;
  c. Oversee the inventory of all computer hardware, printers,
  and other equipment in the MERC;
  d. Maintain and organize software in the MERC;
  e. Obtain and update site licenses for the MERC;
  f. Maintain computer hardware in the MERC;
  g. Facilitate use of MERC equipment by faculty;
  h. Research possible hardware sources and organize equipment
  installation in the MERC;
  i. Work with Academic Computing and other Colleges to optimize
  use of computers on campus.

3. Assigned Time. This position may be supported by assigned
time if recommended by the Department Chair and approved by the
Executive Committee.
. Top | I. Voting |
II. Committees |
III. Positions |
IV. Additional Policies |
End .
Article IV: ADDITIONAL POLICIES
1. Assigned Time Policy (top)
1. Proposals for assigned time assignment other than those
prescribed elsewhere in this Policy File shall be submitted to
the Department Chair prior to the twelfth week of the semester
preceding the semester of the proposed assignment. The Executive
Committee shall approve or disapprove each assignment for the
following semester.
2. Each semester the Department Chair may assign up to two
faculty members 3 units of assigned time each for research in
mathematics or mathematics education and up to two faculty members
3 units of assigned time each for study in fields related to mathematics
or mathematics education. All tenured and probationary faculty
members of the department who are full-time for the entire academic
year are eligible except those ruled ineligible under terms specified
in (a) or (b) below. A faculty member may not have both a research
assignment and study assignment in the same semester. The Department
Chair shall post a list of the recipients of assigned time awards
under this policy each semester. The assignments shall be made
in accordance with the following principles.

a. The Chair will offer the research assignments to
  faculty members from among the eligible members. In each semester,
  research assignments will be offered first to those who have
  not previously accepted a research assignment, and then to those
  who have received a prior research assignment, with those having
  the smaller number of prior research assignments going first
  (this includes Assigned Time Code 22b assignments for Spring
  2000 or later). A faculty member who is offered a research assignment
  shall have one week from the date of offering to submit a proposal
  for work to be accomplished. If the faculty member fails to submit
  the proposal on time the offer will be withdrawn. A faculty member
  who receives a research assignment must make a written report
  at the end of the semester of the assignment with copies to the
  executive committee on research accomplished under the assignment.
  In addition, the faculty member who receives a research assignment
  must deliver to the department at least one colloquium presentation
  relative to the research assignment during the semester of the
  assignment. Failure to make the written report or to deliver
  the colloquium talk will make that member ineligible for future
  research assignments under this policy. The written report is
  to be retained in the department files and the Department Chair
  may use this report to determine whether the faculty member should
  receive future research assignments under this policy.
   
  b. The Chair will offer study assignments to eligible
  faculty on the basis of seniority of service. A faculty member
  who is offered a study assignment shall have one week from the
  date of offer to submit a written proposal for work to be accomplished.
  If the faculty member fails to submit the proposal on time the
  offer will be withdrawn. A faculty member who receives a study
  assignment must give two colloquium presentations relative to
  the study assignment to the department during the semester of
  the assignment or in the semester immediately following the one
  of the assignment. Failure to give these colloquium talks will
  make that member ineligible for future study assignments under
  this policy.

2. Temporary Faculty Appointments (top)
1. Lecturers. Minimum qualifications for a full-time Lecturer
position shall be a Doctorate in Mathematics, Applied Mathematics
or Statistics.
2. Part-Time Faculty. Minimum qualifications for a Part-Time
faculty member position shall be a Masters Degree in Mathematics,
Applied Mathematics or Statistics.
3. Teaching Associates. Minimum qualifications for a Teaching
Associate position shall be a Bachelors Degree in Mathematics,
or the equivalent, and active enrollment in a Masters degree program
at CSULB.
4. Borrowed Faculty. Qualifications for full-time faculty from
another department to teach in the Mathematics Department shall
be those stated above in "2. Part-Time Faculty."
Evaluation of qualifications shall be by the Department Chair
in consultation with the Executive Committee if necessary.
The phrase "Minimum qualifications" in (1), (2) and
(3) is intended to mean the degree requirements only. It is understood
that there may be other qualifications, in addition to the degree,
which will depend on the position to be filled.
Paragraphs 1 - 4 above shall be the requirements for all temporary
positions for teaching courses with prefix "MATH." Qualifications
for temporary positions to teach courses with prefix "MTED"
and "EDSS" within the Mathematics Department shall be
determined by the Department Chair in consultation with the Executive
Committee and the Education Committee.
3. Credit/No Credit (CR/NC) (top)
With the exception of English courses, no upper-division courses
used to fulfill a major requirement, and no course in the Department
of Mathematics, may be taken CR/NC by any student whose declared
degree objective is the Bachelor degree in Mathematics or any
of its options. This policy shall not preclude a student from
obtaining credit for a lower division course in the Department
of Mathematics through Credit By Examination.
4. Evaluation of Department Chair (top)
A first-year Department Chair will be evaluated by the full-time
faculty in both the Fall and Spring of his/her first year and
thereafter in the Spring semester of each subsequent academic
year as Department Chair. The evaluation will be by a form prepared,
distributed and collected by the elected members of the Executive
Committee and given to the Chair.
5. Evaluation of Part-Time Faculty (top)
1. Periodic evaluations of part-time faculty other than Teaching
Assistants, when required, shall be made by the Department Chair.
Such evaluations shall include consideration of student evaluation
data if available, course syllabi and, if conducted, class visitations.
2. Part-time faculty in their first semester shall be visited
in class at least once by the Department Chair or his/her designee,
with at least three working days' prior notification. Other part-time
faculty may be visited at the discretion of the Department Chair
with the same notification. A written report of each class visit
shall be given to the visited instructor, within two working days
of the visit. The instructor shall have the right to discuss this
report with the Department Chair. Visited instructors shall have
the right to a second visitation at their request, during the
same semester if possible, to be handled the same as the first.
3. Reports of class visitations shall be retained by the Department
Chair until the next periodic evaluation of the person visited,
and shall thereafter be destroyed. (The evaluation itself, which
may be based in part on the class visitation report, is forwarded
to the Dean of the College.)
4. Each instructor evaluated shall be given a copy of his/her
proposed evaluation at least five working days before it is forwarded
to the Dean, and shall have the right to meet with the Department
Chair to