


414 Syllabus - Soils 414 (Environmental Biophysics)



<!--



 /* Style Definitions */



p.MsoNormal, li.MsoNormal, div.MsoNormal



	{mso-style-parent:"";



	margin:0in;



	margin-bottom:.0001pt;



	mso-pagination:widow-orphan;



	font-size:12.0pt;



	font-family:"Times New Roman";



	mso-fareast-font-family:"Times New Roman";}



a:link, span.MsoHyperlink



	{color:blue;



	text-decoration:underline;



	text-underline:single;}



a:visited, span.MsoHyperlinkFollowed



	{color:blue;



	text-decoration:underline;



	text-underline:single;}



p



	{margin-right:0in;



	mso-margin-top-alt:auto;



	mso-margin-bottom-alt:auto;



	margin-left:0in;



	mso-pagination:widow-orphan;



	font-size:12.0pt;



	font-family:"Times New Roman";



	mso-fareast-font-family:"Times New Roman";}



@page Section1



	{size:8.5in 11.0in;



	margin:1.0in 1.25in 1.0in 1.25in;



	mso-header-margin:.5in;



	mso-footer-margin:.5in;



	mso-paper-source:0;}



div.Section1



	{page:Section1;}



-->




Soils 414*/514 -
Environmental Biophysics
Spring 2002
Instructor: 
Colin Campbell
251 Johnson Hall, 335-3661
Office Hours:
M10:10-11am and by appointment
(please note:  I rarely will be in my
campus office during other times)
 
Off-campus
office:  Decagon
Devices, 950 NE Nelson Ct., 332-0261 ext. 44,
(I will typically
be in my off-campus office)
colin@decagon.com
(email is a
great way to contact me!)
TA:     
Nu Nu Wai
235-A Johnson Hall Phone: 335-7817
Dept. of Crop and Soil Science.
email: nwai@wsu.edu
Office Hours: Tu/Thur 9:10-10 AM
Course
Format: Two 50-minute lecture periods: M and
W, 9:10-10:00am
Location:   Pullman (Johnson 120). While not
required, it is recommended that the associated lab class (415/515)
be taken simultaneously.
Course Prerequisites:
414 - Upper division standing in biological, physical, or earth
sciences, or engineering
514 - Graduate standing in biological, physical, or earth sciences,
or engineering
Text: G. S. Campbell and J. M. Norman. 1998. An
Introduction to Environmental Biophysics, 2nd ed.
Springer Verlag, New York.
Course Objective Students will use physical principles and
reasoning to describe microenvironments of living organisms and
energy and mass transfer between organisms and their environment.
Within this objective, more specific course goals include:
·  Increased
understanding of microclimates and their effect on organisms;
·  Learning
to understand and work with mathematical expressions to make
estimations where measured values are lacking;
·  Learning
to use microclimatic variables and transfer laws and associated
mathematical expressions to estimate transfer of energy, water, and
gases between organisms and the environment.
Topic Outline
I. Principles of
and mathematical expressions for physical microenvironment
variables
- Temperature
- Water (vapor and liquid)
- Wind
- Radiation
II. Simple models of
energy and mass exchange
- Overview of transport
laws
- Conduction and diffusion
- Convection and turbulence
III. Applications
- Soil temperature and
heat flow
- To animals
- To plant leaves, canopies
Evaluation of Learning:
Quizzes:
Approximately seven (7) announced quizzes (15 to 30 min long) will be
given over the semester, including one in the scheduled final exam
period (TBA). Because an important part of the class is learning how
to choose and use the relevant equations, students will be
allowed to bring one 3 x 5 index card to each quiz containing
equations relevant to material covered (in other words,
understanding and use of equations is emphasized, not
memorization!).
Homework: Due to the
abundance of new terms and equations in each section, homework will
be given frequently. These assignments will consist of problems to be
solved using the principles and relations in past and current course
material, as well as discussion questions designed to draw
relationships between the subject material and our every day
lives.
The homework will be checked but not
graded other than for participation. Each assignment will be worth 1
point. The homework total will carry the same weight as one quiz
(below). In some cases the problems may include a computer exercise,
given by the instructor or available on the Internet.
The problem portion of the assignments
should be submitted neatly on paper. SHOW ALL WORK when solving
problems. The major goal of the problem sets is to give you practice
working with the concepts and relationships described in class. (The
online discussion portion of the assignments does not need to be
printed out.) Your time spent on these assignments will greatly aid
in your understanding of the fundamentals.
Class attendance is
considered to be an essential component of this course. Class
participation is encouraged, especially if questions and comments
reflect thought and preparation of the material.
514 Requirements: In
addition to the homework and quizzes discussed above, students
enrolled in 514 are also required to complete and present (written
and oral) an independent research project. 514 students are required
to meet an additional hour (arranged time) approximately weekly to
plan and discuss the research projects, including related literature
and skills necessary to carry out the research.
- The project will
involve data analysis or modeling relevant to the student’s own
field of interest. A journal-quality written report of the project
and results is due to the instructor by April 21. A 10 minute
professional-quality oral presentation of the work and findings will
be given to the group taking the 500-level version. More details will
be provided in a separate handout.
- Students who are also enrolled in 515
may combine research projects for the two classes so that the project
can involve both field data collection and modeling/analysis.
 
Final Grade
Determination:
414 - Grades will
be based on the scores of the quizzes plus completion of the
homework.
514 - The research project and presentation will account for
20% of the final grade. The remaining portion of the final grade will
be based on the scores of the quizzes plus completion of the homework
(80%).
Students with Disabilities: Reasonable
accommodation will be made for students who have a documented
disability. Please notify the instructor during the first week of
class of any accommodation needed for the course. Late notification
may mean that the requested accommodation cannot be made.
* Crosslisted as Env.Sci. 414, and also through the Botany
Program at Univ. of Idaho
Questions/Comments?

Return
to Soils 414 homepage
Dept. of  Crop and Soil
Sciences
Washington State University
Pullman, WA 99164-6420




Copyright
© Washington State University  Disclaimer
Modified 1/08/01 C.S.
Campbell
 



