





Physics 433/ Philosophy 433 




Physics 433/ Philosophy 433

Physics and Philosophy of Space and Time

Welcome to the Physics and Philosophy of Space and Time course web page.
This course is offered Spring Semester 1998. Here we will provide information
about the course as well as materials. Both lecture materials and other
background materials will be provided as the course developes. 

  Note that we intend to make extensive use of this web page.  Please refer to it on
a regular basis for occasional extra materials, lecture notes, and hand-outs.  This web page is the only
source for the contents of the manuscript The Evolution of the Concepts of Space and Time. The web page
address is 

http://chandra.bgsu.edu/~gcd/ppst.html

 
Course Instructors:


Comer Duncan, Professor of Physics, Department of Physics and Astronomy, 173 Oveman
Hall; Office Hours by appointment; Telephone: 372 8108; you may also visit
my web page.

Michael Bradie, Professor of Philosophy, Department of Philosophy, 325 Shatzel Hall, Office
Hours by appointment: Telephone: 372 8372

Course Information
 
Course materials: 

Selected sections of The Evolution of the Concepts of Space and Time, a
manuscript by Professors Bradie and Duncan.

Hand-outs on various space and time topics will be provided.

 When possible, links in this web page to the lectures and selected hand-outs will be made
as the term proceeds.

A bibliography of some key references will be provided.


 Course Objectives: 
This course is an introduction to the philosophy and physics of space and
time.  Among the topics to be covered are Zeno's paradoxes, the dispute
between Newton and Leibnitz on the nature of space and time, the relationship
between geometry and physics, a survey of the foundations of the theory of
the special theory of relativity, the geometrization of gravitation by
Einstein's general theory of relativity and gravitation.  The emphasis is on
a discussion of the conceptual foundations and a tracing of the evolution
of the concepts of space and time from the pre-socratics to the present day.
The treatment is essentially non-mathematical with some inclusion of
mathematical
concepts needed to fill out the development.  Among the more philosophical
issues, we will examine the relation of models to reality, the role of 
convention in scientific theories, questions of evidence and testability of
scientific models, and questions of determinism and causality.

Course Syllabus

Meeting DateLecture TopicSupporting Materials
Jan. 13IntroductionB & D Chapter 1, B & D Chapter 2
Jan. 15 Zeno I B & D Chapter 3
Jan. 20 Zeno II B & D Chapter 3
Jan. 22 Zeno III B & D Chapter 3, Infinities
Jan. 27 Zeno IV B & D Chapter 3
Jan. 29Plato's UniverseB & D Chapter 4
Feb. 3Aristotle's UniverseB & D Chapter 5
Feb. 5Newton IB & D Chapters 6 , B & D Chapters 7
Feb. 10Newton IIB & D Chapter 7
Feb. 12Newton IIIB & D Chapter 7
Feb. 17Leibnitz IB & D Chapter 8
Feb. 19Leibnitz IIB & D Chapter 8
Feb. 24Absolute vs Relational Theories
Feb. 26Alternative Geometries
Mar. 3Space, Geometry, and Convention
Mar. 5Gauss' 'Experiment'
Mar. 10Spring Break-no class
Mar. 12Spring Break-no class
Mar. 17Mach's Critique of NewtonB & D Chapter 8
Mar. 19Space, Time, and EventsB & D Chapter 9      Term Paper I Due
Mar. 24Primacy of LightB & D Chapter 10
Mar. 26Special Relativity: FoundationsB & D Chapter 11 
Mar. 31Speical Relativity: EffectsB & D Chapter 12
Apr. 2Geometrization of Special RelativityB & D Chapter 13,  Lecture notes
Apr. 7The Principle of EquivalenceB & D Chapter 14,   Lecture notes
Apr. 9Geometrization of Gravity IB & D Chapter 14, Term Paper 2 Refs.
Apr. 14Geometrization of Gravity IIB & D Chapter 15,  Lecture notes
Apr. 16Black HolesB & D Chapter 15  Curvature   Field Eqns,Black Holes
Apr. 21Introduction to Cosmology Second Term Paper Topics
Apr. 23Introduction to Quantum Phenomena
Apr. 28Quantum and Gravity: Challenges
Apr. 30
Future Developments in Space and TimeTerm Paper II Due 
May 6Exam WeekFINAL EXAM DATE: May 8, 1:15-3:15 p.m.
May 8Exam Week














Requirements for the course: 

A knowledge of mathematics at least at the
level of high school.  Knowing calculus is a plus.  Any further study in
mathematics would be helpful, but not necessarily a requirement.

Grading: 

There will be two term papers.  The first will be due
on March 19 and will cover material from the first half of the course. The
second paper will be due April 30 and will cover material from the second
half of the course. We will hand out term paper topics at a later date, as 
well as discuss our requirements on the content of the papers.


There will be a number of weekly homework exercises - one or
two problems that will test your understanding of the materials.  These
will be distributed on Thursdays and collected the following Tuesday.


The course grade will be determined from the performance on these two papers
along with an assessment of the student's class participation.  You are 
expected to attend class regularly and be prepared to discuss the assigned
reading material.  The class participation factor may raise your grade but
will not lower it.



