

Course Information for Ling645/CMSC723



Course Information for Ling645/CMSC723
Introduction to Computational Linguistics


Vincent's Corner (where the important stuff is!)

Class newsgroup: read often!

General description
  

Location and time |
  Instructors |
  Textbooks |
  Course Description |
  Course Requirements 

Class information
  

Syllabus |
  Assignments |
  Lecture Notes |
  Other References

Course accounts
  

Computer Accounts |
  OIT Home Page |
  List of OIT Cluster Machines 

Useful resources
  

LISP Resources |
  Unix Resources      |
  Perl Resources 



General Course Information

Where/When: 
Wednesdays, 1:00pm-3:30pm, 
The first class will be in

Symons Hall, Room 0200 but after that the class will meet in

AV Williams, Room 1112.


Professors: 
Bonnie Dorr,
  bonnie@cs.umd.edu,
  Office hours: Tuesdays, 1pm, AV Williams 3157
Philip Resnik,
  resnik@umiacs.umd.edu,
  Office hours: Wednesdays, 4pm, AV Williams 3143


Teaching Assistant: 
Wei-han (Vincent) Huang,
  vincenth@wam.umd.edu,
   Office hours: MW 3:30-4:30pm, TA room, first floor AV Williams Bldg.


Textbooks: 

Required:

  Dan Jurafsky and James Martin, 
        "Speech and Language Processing: An Introduction to Natural
         Language Processing, Speech Recognition, and Computational
         Linguistics", Prentice-Hall (2000). 

Recommended/Useful:

  James Allen, "Natural Language Understanding, 2nd ed.",
        Benjamin/Cummings, 1995. 
  David Touretzky, Common Lisp: A
  Gentle Introduction to Symbolic Computation (entire book
  downloadable from this Web site!).  An excellent introduction to
  Common LISP with lots of clear explanation and exercises with solutions.
  Guy L. Steele, Jr., "Common Lisp: The Language", 
	Digital Press, 1990, ISBN 1555580416. 
        You don't necessarily have to buy this book:
	there is also an 
        on-line version.
  



Course Description
General statement. This course is an introduction to
computational linguistics.  It assumes some basic familiarity with
linguistics concepts and requires the ability to program.  We will be
covering traditional foundations of computational linguistics areas
such as finite-state methods, context-free and extended context-free
models of syntax, parsing, and semantic interpretation; basics of more
recent corpus-based and stochastic methods such as n-gram models,
hidden Markov models, probabilistic grammars, and statistical methods
for word sense disambiguation; and some selection of application areas
from among such topics as information retrieval, machine translation,
computational psycholinguistics, and computational lexicography.
Concepts taught in class will be reinforced in practice by hands-on
programming assignments.



Course Requirements

 Exercises.  Students will turn in (a) a program
listing, and (b) a trace of the code working successfully.  Students
are encouraged to work together, but every assignment must contain one
of the following statements: 

 I completed this assignment solo.
   I collaborated to a small extent with [name(s)] on this assignment.
   I collaborated extensively with [name(s)] on this assignment.
  
 Programming projects. These will be larger in
scope than the exercises, and may or may not be distributed with
solutions.  Students may choose to collaborate as for the exercises,
but each module or subroutine must identify a single primary author,
to be agreed upon by the collaborating students. 
 Exams. The course will have a mid-term exam and
a final exam, with no final programming project. 
Grading in the course will be based on 60% for the exercises and
programming projects and 20% each for the midterm and final.




  Philip Resnik                        Phone:   (301) 405-6760
  Department of Linguistics            Fax:     (301) 405-7104
  1401 Marie Mount Hall
  University of Maryland 
  College Park, MD 20742 USA

  Bonnie Dorr                          Phone:   (301) 405-6768
  Computer Science Department
  3157 AV Williams Building
  University of Maryland 
  College Park, MD 20742 USA

By far the best way to reach us is by e-mail to 
bonnie@cs.umd.edu and resnik@umiacs.umd.edu.



This page last updated February 01, 2001.


