
Info Net Economics -- Syllabus




Info Net Economics -- Syllabus

Econ 495 (Department of Economics, LSA)
University of Michigan
Winter 1994 (Mondays 4:00-5:30 pm, 171 Lorch Hall)
Instructor: Jeffrey K. MacKie-Mason
Office Hours: Wednesdays 1-3 pm, or by appointment)
Contacts: jmm@umich.edu, 764-7438

TA: Jon Bakija
Office Hours: Tuesdays and Wednesdays, 11:30-12:30 pm, 106 Lorch




This page and presentation of information is Copyright
© 1994, 1995 by  Jeff
MacKie-Mason (jmm@umich.edu). All rights reserved. 

Jump to other pages:

 Class schedule
 Readings and resources
 Written assignments
 Due dates
 Peer reviewer assignments
 Submitted student papers
 Project ideas
 Internet and Web resources
 
	Hypermail archive of interesting items
 (Usenet) News group for
       this class -- use for discussion of interesting topics


Introduction

Welcome to the syllabus page for Econ 495, Information Networks
Economics.  This page contains all of the official information and
requirements for the course.  There are links to other pages with a
class schedule, assignment due dates, paper ideas, Internet tools, and
reading resources.

This is an honors seminar on economic issues surrounding the
development of an information network infrastructure.  The focus will
be on the emergence of integrated services, broadband public switched
networks.  We will consider a variety of old and new media through
this lens, with an emphasis on convergence and the driving forces of
new technologies.  

Some of the questions we will address: Why do networks develop, and
will current voice, video and data networks converge into a single,
integrated information "superhighway"?  Should the government guide
network development, or even pay directly for the national information
infrastructure?  How should scarce network bandwidth, information
services and information itself be priced?  Who owns information, and
how can intellectual property be protected?

Most of the resources for this course will be found on the
Internet.  Your written work must be submitted over the network, and
will be in the form of hypertext documents that can be published on
the network.
Writing

This is also an ECB upper-level writing course, whether or not you
have elected it as such.  There will be a significant amount of
writing, and some class time will be devoted to writing.  There is
also a TA for the seminar, whose primary responsibility will be to
evaluate and assist you with your writing.

The ECB offers writing assistance.  As an undergraduate, you have the
right to a 30 minute session with an ECB writing specialist every
week of every semester.  All of you should be taking advantage of
that: even the best writers can improve substantially, and good
writing is one of the single most important skills in almost any
profession.  The best writers know that nothing helps more than having
another good writer read your work and make suggestions.  Please take
your drafts and revised drafts to ECB.  In addition, from time to
time either the TA or I may specifically refer you to ECB for extra
assistance.
Toolkit

You will need to become familiar with some Internet resource discovery
tools, and with writing and editing in HTML (Hypertext Markup
Language).  A number of introductory documents, resource centers, and
reference materials for using the Web and HTML are collected for you
here.
Requirements

 This is a seminar.  The most important requirement is that you come
       prepared to discuss each week's topic.
   Two short discussion memos (plus at least one revision of
       each), and two peer reviews.  The first
       memo is due 23 January; the second memo is staggered throughout
       the term.
   A term paper and a peer review: proposal due 13 February;
       detailed outline due 13 March;  due 10 April; revision due 24 April.


All written assignments must be submitted electronically, as HTML
documents (except for peer reviewer comments); memos and term papers
will be posted on the class server for everyone to read.  Peer reviews
are due one week after the first draft is submitted.  The revised
draft is due one week after the peer review.

Click here to see a more detailed
discussion of the assignments.  Here are the due dates.
Materials and Starting Points

The two most important resources for you to start with are WWW servers
maintained by me and Prof. Hal Varian.  Mine contains over 350 links
to Telecom
Information Resources on the net; Hal's contains all of the
interesting materials on the Economics of
the Internet that he has found on the net.

I have collected a number of interesting articles and commentaries
from various electronic mailing lists and other places.  They are
collected in a 
Hypermail archive where you can look through them by subject,
author or date.  This is a good place to browse to get some ideas
about various policy and economic debates taking place.

Here is a page with some 
fun things.

Topics and Schedule

 Class schedule
 Readings and resources


 Jeff MacKie-Mason / University of Michigan / <jmm@umich.edu>  

Last modified: Fri Aug 25 07:56:05 1995



