

Rome Center - Course Syllabi















 Studies Catalog  2002-2003 
Course Syllabi


  All courses carry
three semester hours' credit. The University reserves the right
to
cancel a
course due to insufficient enrollment or the unavailability of a
suitable
professor. Students should bear in mind that 300-level courses  
presume prior contextual background or understanding, so they should
not register for courses for which they may be
unprepared. 


ClSt 306 / FnAr 336  
 An Introduction to Greek Art  
FALL 
Prof. Giovanni Scichilone 
 Objectives
This course synthetically discusses the origins and the evolution of Greek Art against a relatively 
broad background with reference to the surviving evidence - literary and archaeological.  Special 
attention is given to the connections established by the Greeks with their Mediterranean neighbours 
across time and space as well as to the complex processes leading to the "formation" of a Greek Art.
Reference will also be made to the impact of Greek art and culture over later cultures of our world. 
The course aims to stimulate critical ability, visual sensitivity and an interest for considering the  
visual arts as a primary "tool" in the process of reconstructing and understanding cultures of the past. 

 Methodology
Every lesson will be richly illustrated by original slides from the instructor's collection; some of 
them will include readings from ancient written sources in translation.  In all cases class discussion 
and active participation in classwork are to be considered crucial and are highly valued and encouraged 
by the instructor.  Moreover, since the wealth of points and comparisons discussed in class can only in 
part find a substitute in the required readings for the course, class attendance is strongly 
recommended. 
After the first mid-term, the students will choose, under the instructor's guidance, the topic for an 
individual project in writing (a brief essay or a book report for the equivalent of 4-to-6 typed pages) 
ideally reflecting a personal interest within the scope of the course.  
 Syllabus 
References, unless otherwise stated, are to John Boardman,  Greek Art.  
 Lesson 1 
Greek Art today - an introduction.  Geography and resources of the Greek lands.  The Greek-speaking 
ancestors of the Greeks in the 2nd millennium B.C. (pp. 9 to 18)
 Lesson 2 
Life and art in the Bronze-Age citadels of Greece.  Economy, resources, techniques and crafts.  The 
Mycenaeans and their Mediterranean neighbours. (reading of abstract from J. Boardman's  Pre-Classical 
)
 Lesson 3 
The collapse of the Mycenaean kingdoms, 12th century B.C.  The rise of Greek villages and their economy; 
the role of pottery.  Athens in the "Dark Ages" of Greece. (pp. 19 to 28)
 Lesson 4 
The dawn of Greek architecture; village, sanctuary, and temple in the 8th century B.C. Overseas contacts 
of the Greeks.  The rise of pan-Hellenic sanctuaries at Olympia and Delphi. (pp. 29 to 40)
 Lesson 5 
The Greeks and their art in the Mediterranean world of the 7th century B.C.  Corinth, Athens, and their 
artistic markets. (pp. 40 to 54)
 Lesson 6 
The "formalization" of artistic types: temple and statue in Greece and overseas in the 7th 
century B.C. (pp. 54 to 58)
 Lesson 7 
Archaic Greek Art: sculpture and architecture on the Greek mainland and in the East, 600 to 500 B.C. 
(pp. 59 to 79)
 Lesson 8 
The world of Greek pottery in the Archaic Period: potter, painter, techniques, styles. The lost treasure 
of Greek easel- and wall-painting. (pp. 79 to 98)
 Lesson 9 
Art in continental Greece, 500 to 450 B.C.: temples in Egina and Olympia, with their sculptural 
decoration.  The evolution of vase-painting in Athens.  (pp. 102 to 114)
 Lesson 10 
The reconstruction of the Athenian Acropolis under Pericles: layout, architectural designs and 
sculptural decoration.  The Propylaea and other buildings. (pp. 115 to 125)
 Lesson 11 
The Parthenon, its masters and its impact over Greek art.  Art in Greece 450 to 400 B.C. (pp. 125 to 
131; suggested reading from J.J. Pollit,  Art and Experience in Classical Greece, pp. 71 to 97)
 Lesson 12 
Art, artists, and art criticism in Greece, 4th century B.C.; an overview. (pp. 131 to 144)
 Lesson 13 
Aspects of post-classical Greek art; courts and kingdoms as art centers.  The Roman conquest of the 
Greek world.  The legacy of Greek art; a brief overview. (pp. 223 to 235)  
 Grading   
The final grade for this course will be calculated in accordance with the following percentages:
 First mid-term (open book/open notes test) ............10%
 Second mid-term..................................................30%
 Project ................................................................10%
 Active class participation ......................................10%
 Final test ............................................................40%  
Please note that the first and second mid-term exams will take place six weeks apart. 



ClSt 307 / FnAr 337 / RoSt 307  
 An Introduction to Etruscan and Roman Art  
SPRING 
Prof. Giovanni Scichilone 
 Objectives
This course synthetically discusses both of the most relevant cultures flourishing in the Italian 
peninsula in ancient times, seeing art and its trends against the background of contemporary 
history. Due to the relative lack of adequate written sources, the Etruscans will be largely 
discussed on the basis of the abundant archaeological evidence and through the effects of their 
interaction with Mediterranean and Italian neighbours.  Though briefly, there will also be mentioned the 
complex problems related with their origins and with the interpretation of their "lost" language. 
The Etruscan impact over early Rome, the rise of the Roman republic and its growth into a world-wide 
empire will be discussed against the rich background supplied from sources of all sorts.  On the other 
hand, the impact of Greek culture over Rome as well as the rise of a genuinely Roman artistic tradition 
will be referred to from different viewpoints.  
The course tries to stimulate critical ability, visual sensitivity and an interest for considering art
in its historical context, as an essential "clue" to reconstruct and understand the cultures of the 
past.

 Methodology
Every lesson will be richly illustrated by original slides from the instructor's collection.
In all cases class discussion
and active participation in classwork are strongly encouraged.  Since the wealth of materials 
discussed in class can only in
part find a substitute in the required readings, class attendance is strongly
recommended. 
After the first mid-term, each student will choose, under the instructor's guidance, the topic for an   
individual project in writing  
ideally reflecting a personal interest within the scope of the course; such projects - in the format of 
a brief essay or book report for the equivalent of 4 to 6 typed pages - are to be completed two weeks 
prior to the end of the semester.  
 Syllabus 
References are to Nigel Spivey, Etruscan Art, London, 1997, and to George M.A. Hanfmann, Roman 
Art, New York, 1975 
 Lesson 1 
The Italian peninsula in Late Bronze / Early Iron Age.  Central Italy: geography, land, resources. 
"Villanovans" and early Etruscans: social organization, economy, artifacts, ritual life. (Spivey, pp. 
7-16, 25-39)
 Lesson 2 
The archaeological evidence from the Etruscan sites of Latium and Tuscany, 10th to 7th centuries B.C. 
The advent of mound-burials in Cerveteri and elsewhere. (Spivey, pp. 81-93)
 Lesson 3 
The Etruscans and their Mediterranean neighbours. Cities, trades, art and cross-cultural relationships 
in the Etruscan world. (Spivey, pp. 17-24, 40-52)
 Lesson 4 
The "golden age" of the Etruscan cities and their influence across the Tiber over Rome and Latium. 
(Spivey, pp. 53-66, 119-123)
 Lesson 5 
A visual archive on the world of the Etruscans: the painted tombs of Tarquinia. (Spivey, pp. 66-76, 
100-119)
 Lesson 6 
The collapse of the Etruscan power in Italy and beyond; the rise of the Roman Republic. (Spivey, pp. 
183-197 and class notes)
 Lesson 7 
Rome and its conquests in Italy and beyond, 4th to 2nd centuries B.C. The Roman contribution to 
engineering and architecture.  (reading from A. Boethius -  Italy before the Empire )
 Lesson 8 
Art in Roman Italy at the threshold of the Empire.  The art-market for Rome.  Aspects of portraiture and 
of architectural design. (Hanfmann, pp. 15-19, 24-26, 63-65, 88-91, and related illustrations)
 Lesson 9 
Rome and the Roman world under Augustus and his dynasty. (Hanfmann, pp. 82-83, 102-107, 248-249, 268-285 
and related illustrations)
 Lesson 10 
A walk through the heart of ancient Rome (Theatre of Marcellus, Capitol, Via Sacra, Forum Vetus, Temple 
of Venus Genetrix, Imperial Fora). (Hanfmann, pp. 59-60, 66, 68-69, and related illustrations)
 Lesson 11 
Towards a "new art:" trends in painting, sculpture, and architecture, 50-100 A.D. (Hanfmann, pp. 27-30, 
76, 108-109 and related illustrations)
 Lesson 12 
Roman art under Trajan and Hadrian, 98-138 A.D. (Hanfmann, pp. 69-72, 72-73, 79, 96, 110-112, 286-287)
 Lesson 13 
The age of crisis and the collapse of the Empire: an overview.  The legacy of Roman Art. (Hanfmann, pp.  
31-33, 123-126, 262-265 and related illustrations)  
 Grading  
The final grade for this course will be calculated in accordance with the following percentages:
 First mid-term (open book/open notes test) ............10%
 Second mid-term.................................................30%
 Project ...............................................................10%
 Active class participation .....................................10%
 Final test ............................................................40% 
Please note that the first and second mid-term exams will take place six weeks apart. 



 ClSt 334 / Anth 334   
 An Introduction to Classical Archaeology  
FALL 
Prof. Giovanni Scichilone 
 Objectives
With special attention to the cultures of the Ancient Mediterranean, the course is meant to offer a 
fuller appreciation of modern archaeology with its scientific methodologies for the recovery, the 
interpretation and the presentation of the surviving evidence.  Well beyond "mass-myth" and 
misconceptions, the course discusses fieldwork, finds, sites and museums - as we see them today - as 
"tools" for research and knowledge and in connection with the very complex problems met in the 
conservation of the evidence.  The course also relates archaeology to several sciences and to modern 
education, trying to highlight the relevant reciprocal connections and/or contributions. 
To reflect also the long-lived interest shown by human groups for their own (and at times for other 
people's) past, the second part of the course (Lessons 9 to 12) will offer an overview of the changing 
approach of different societies to the past; this will be seen in ancient Greece and Rome, in specific 
moments of the European Middle Ages and of the Italian Renaissance, and in the following centuries up to 
the 1800's.  In this part of the course, students will have a chance to consider little-known aspects in 
the evolution of our interest for the relics and some "values" of our heritage. Moreover, as a 
fragment of the history of science, the growth of archaeology as a discipline will be synthetically 
followed. 
 Methodology  
To present with adequate clarity the material, each lesson will be richly illustrated by original slides 
from the instructor's collection as a visual stimulus for discussion in class.  Taking into 
consideration the complex scope of the course, active participation in classwork is to be considered 
crucial and will be highly encouraged and valued by the instructor.  Moreover, since no reasonably-sized
printed source is available in English to cover the range of topics under discussion, the students are 
expected to rely on adequate class notes; the instructor will be obviously available to discuss and 
enrich such notes whenever necessary.  On specific topics (marked "+&+" in the syllabus), abstracts 
in English from printed sources will be made available by the instructor.  For a variety of reasons, not 
the least of which is the length of classes, the instructor strongly recommends class attendance.  
After the first mid-term, the students will choose, under the instructor's guidance, the topic for an
individual project in writing (a brief essay or a book report for the equivalent of 4-to-6 typed pages) 
ideally reflecting a personal interest within the scope of the course.  
 Syllabus  
 Lesson 1  
Archaeology as a discipline: a tentative definition.  The
archaeology of the classical world (11th c.  B.C. to 5th c. A.D.) as a specific field.  Reality and
popular "myth" in the perception of archaeology.  The interaction of man / environment and its traces
for the archaeologist.  
 Lesson 2  
The search for (and the production of) durable documents as
the chore-task of archaeological research.  Before excavation: methods, techniques and tools for
archaeology.  Typical situations in fieldwork.  (+&+)  
 Lesson 3  
Modern archaeology vs.
"treasure hunting:" interdisciplinary approaches to the past.  Field conservation and its contribution
to the appreciation and survival of the evidence.  Complex cases from Italian sites.  
 Lesson 4 
Object - Type - Class: basic concepts for archaeological interpretation.  Circulation and cultural
interaction through space and time.  Economy, history, and cultural anthropology in archaeological
research. (+&+)  
 Lesson 5  
Presenting the evidence on site: problems, methods, aims.  
Research, education and leisure in post-modern societies.  The presence of the past in historical towns.  
Issues in the protection of the heritage.  
 Lesson 6  
The role of museums in the conservation of
the evidence: the long path from soil to showcases. Issues in the museum profession.  The economic
relevance of the past: the "heritage industry" as a global phenomenon. (+&+)  
 Lesson 7 
Museography and museology for archaeological collections: examples from Europe and the U.S.A.  
Education and communication through museum displays.  
 Lesson 8  
The Athenian acropolis as the case study in the recovery, interpretation, conservation, and 
presentation of an archaeological site. "Ruins" and their limits: visible remains and history. 
"Symbolic values" and heritage. 
 Lesson 9  
The Greeks and their past: the birth of an archaeology. Past and identity
in the words of the Greeks.  Greece and Rome: conquest, cultural interaction and plundering.  The Roman
Empire as a "global market"  for heritage.  
 Lesson 10  
The "end of the classical world" and its
survival through the Middle Ages. Of "filthy ruins" and "hidden books." The "rediscovery" of Rome and
the "loss" of Athens under the Turks. (+&+) 
 Lesson 11  
The "rebirth:" Renaissance and classical heritage through an archaeologist's eye.  Artists and "ruins" 
in Rome and beyond.  The ancestry of modern museums: collecting and collections in Rome and Florence.
 Lesson 12 
The dawn of modern archaeology: exploration, discovery and collecting to the end of the 19th century. 
The marbles of the Acropolis in London: the Elgin "affaire" and other cases in the growth of 
archaeology. (+&+)
 Lesson 13 
Closing the circle: archaeology yesterday and today.  What future for archaeology: trends and 
contradictions?  The management of the past: revivals, nostalgia and learning.  
 Grading  
The final grade for this course will be calculated in accordance with the following percentages:
 First mid-term (open book/open notes test) ............10%
 Second mid-term..................................................30%
 Project ................................................................10%
 Active class participation ......................................10%
 Final test ............................................................40% 
Please note that the first and second mid-term exams will take place six weeks apart. 



 ClSt 340 / Anth 340 / RCS 340   
 Classical Archaeology: The Idea of the Temple in Greek Architecture  
SPRING 
Prof. Giovanni Scichilone 
 Objectives
The course aims to relate the architectural type of "temple" to more than its visible form, with 
reference to various sources -- historical, literary, and archaeological.  Through space and time, the 
course reviews the birth of cult-places in the Greek lands, far before the creation of the earliest 
known temples.  While following the growth of an entirely Greek idea of temple, special attention is 
given to the interaction of Greek communities with their Mediterranean neighbours and both ritual and 
social functions of cult-places are explored. 
Insofar as design and styles are concerned, they are discussed side-by-side with the 
limitations and the achievements of ancient technology and engineering in Greece and beyond.  The 
appreciation of the exceptional creations of Greek temple-architecture, especially in the 5th century 
B.C., will therefore benefit by an analysis going beyond purely stylistic aspects. 
In general, the course tries to stimulate critical ability, visual sensitivity, and an interest for 
appreciating architecture in its historical and technological context, with attention for its functional 
roots.
Methodology 
The architectural evidence is reviewed through passages from the last available edition of the standard 
handbook of the late Prof. W.B. Dinsmoor (The Architecture of Ancient Greece, New York, 1975) to 
be used along with readings from other sources and notes from classwork. 
In all cases class discussion and participation in classwork are strongly encouraged. All lectures
will be richly illustrated by original slides from the instructor's collection.
Since the wealth of materials discussed in class can only in
part find an equivalent in the required readings, class attendance is highly
recommended.   
After the first mid-term, each student will choose, with the instructor's guidance, the topic for an
individual project in writing,
ideally reflecting a personal interest within the scope of the course; such projects - in the format of
a brief essay or book report for the equivalent of 4 to 6 typed pages - are to be completed two weeks 
prior to the end of the semester.  
 Syllabus  
 Lessons 1 & 2 
Greek Temples: their image today and their forerunners in the ancient Mediterranean.  The Mycenaean 
ancestry of Greek religion: a brief review.  Greek sites from the late Bronze Age: an overview. 
(Dinsmoor, pp. xv-xxiv, 17-24 and class notes.)
 Lesson 3 
Settlements and cult-places in the "Dark Ages" of Greece, 11th to 9th c. B.C.  Techniques and materials 
of early Greek architecture. Sanctuaries in Sparta and Samos. Temples and temple-models. (Dinsmoor, pp. 
36-50.)
 Lesson 4 
Greece and Greek culture in the 8th c. B.C.: an overview.  The "colonial enterprises" of Greek cities.  
The rise of pan-hellenic cults and sanctuaries. (Reading from abstract of M.I. Finley's  The Ancient 
Greeks,  1982, pp. 36-53.)
 Lesson 5 
Ritual function and spatial arrangements in open-air cult-places. Samos and Olympia before 600 B.C.  
Carpentry and architecture in temples of the 7th c. B.C. (Dinsmoor, pp. 50-58 & class notes.)
 Lesson 6 
Formalizing a concept: the rise of a "Doric" style in Greek temple-construction. Temples in Corfu and 
Corinth.  The beginnings of Ionic temples in the Mediterranean East: temples in Samos and Ephesos. 
(Dinsmoor, pp. 58-64, 69-75, 123-136.) 
 Lesson 7 
Origins, tools, techniques, and materials for stone-construction and their adoption in religious 
architecture. (Seminar class; class notes indispensable.)
 Lesson 8 
The Western Greeks and their approach to religious architecture: the case of Selinus in Sicily and 
Paestum in southern Italy. (Dinsmoor, pp. 78-84, 92-96.)
 Lesson 9 
Architectural design, composition, and decoration in the early 5th c. B.C.: the sanctuary of Aphaia on 
the island of Aegina. (Dinsmoor, pp. 105-107 & class notes.)
 Lesson 10 
Destruction and reconstruction in Athens.  A new design for Zeus in Olympia. (Dinsmoor, pp. 147-153 & 
class notes.)
 Lesson 11 
Redefining styles and orders: the reconstruction of the Athenian acropolis after 447 B.C. (Dinsmoor, pp. 
159-179, 199-205.)
 Lessons 12 & 13 
Developments of temple architecture after the 5th c. B.C.  Changing attitudes in religious architecture 
and cult.  The legacy of Greek temples in Western architecture.  (Dinsmoor, pp. 185-195, 154-159, 
216-236 & class notes.)  
 Grading  
The final grade for this course will be calculated in accordance with the following percentages:
 First mid-term (open book/open notes test) ............10%
 Second mid-term..................................................30%
 Home Project........................................................10%
 Active class participation ......................................10%
 Final test ............................................................40% 
Please note that the first and second mid-term exams will take place six weeks apart. 



 ClSt 395 / RoSt 395   
 Topography of Ancient Rome  
On-Site 
FALL & SPRING 
Prof. James G. DeVoto 
 Required Texts: 
 A. Macadam, Blue Guide: Rome, 7th ed. (London, 2001)
 A. Claridge, Rome: Oxford Archaeological Guide (Oxford, 1998)  
 Purpose:  
The aim of the course is to acquaint students with ancient remains and with some of the principal 
archaeological museums of one of the western world's greatest cities. 
 Procedure:  
The course will proceed chiefly through lectures on site.  The only exceptions will be the first meeting 
and the dates of the three examinations, all in classroom GL1.  Since the course involves  inspection 
of physical evidence  as well as reading assignments, attendance is crucial.  Students should note 
that travel is not an excuse for absence either from lectures or from the three 
examinations. 
 Grading:  
Three equally-weighted non-comprehensive examinations will determine the final grade.  For each test, 
students must be prepared to identify slides, words or phrases and to write two essays from a choice of 
three or four topics.  Essays will constitute 60% and identifications 40% of the grade on each test.  
The scale will be as follows: 90 to 100 = A, 80 to 89 = B, etc. 
 Office Hours:  
Room 116 on Tuesdays and Thursdays from 1200 to 1300 hours and by appointment. 
 Schedule of Readings and Sites:  
 Week 1 
Introduction in GL1: Claridge, pp. 1-14; Macadam, pp. 45-53.
 Week 2 
Archaic Roman Forum: Claridge, pp. 60-118; Macadam, pp. 45-53, 78-95.
 Week 3 
Capitoline Hill: Claridge, pp. 229-241; Macadam, pp. 59-72.
 Week 4 
Later Forum Romanum: Claridge, pp. 60-118; Macadam, pp. 78-95.
 Week 5 
First Test.
 Week 6 
Forum Boarium: Claridge, pp. 253-61; Macadam, pp. 245-248.
 Week 7 
Forum Holitorium: Claridge, pp. 242-253; Macadam, pp. 240-243.
 Week 8 
Largo Argentina and Pantheon: Claridge, pp. 201-208, 215-220; Macadam, pp. 118-122, 126-127.
 Week 9 
The Imperial Palatine: Claridge, pp. 119-145; Macadam, pp. 95-106.
 Week 10 
Second Test.
 Week 11 
Imperial Fora and Flavian Amphitheater: Claridge, pp. 147-173, 276-283; Macadam, pp. 106-112, 
115-188.
 Week 12 
Roman Walls, Bridges, and the Tiber Island: Claridge, pp. 226-228; Macadam, p. 243.
 Week 13 
Roman Baths (at Caracalla's): Claridge, pp. 319-321; Macadam, pp.235-237.
 Select Saturday 
Ostia Antiqua: Macadam, pp. 368-380.
 Week 14 
Third Test.  
Before each site visit, students should consult Claridge especially for all items posted on the bulletin 
board across from the portineria. Moreover, the library will have L. Richardson's  New 
Topographical Dictionary of Ancient Rome, F. Coarelli's Guida Archeologica di Roma, and an 
illustrated guide to Ostia on reserve to help students prepare for each visit and the three tests.  In 
addition, entries in reference works such as the Oxford Classical Dictionary, The Princeton 
Encyclopedia of Classical Sites, or Grant and Kitzinger's Mediterranean Civilizations will 
prove helpful about individuals and monuments discussed in the lectures. 



Comments common to all Prof. Auteri's syllabi 
Student Contact Hours:  Thursday or by appointment

REQUIRED COURSE WORK  
 Students may need to allocate 3-5 hours each week outside of class time to master the material of 
the course. It is essential to keep up with the course material.  Students will be asked to solve problem 
sets. These can  be done in groups of 2-3 students and presented orally in class if asked.
 The lectures will emphasize the major topics and hopefully clarify what appears in the reading 
assignment.
 Problems will be used liberally to illustrate the major concepts. The basic readings should be done 
prior to the lecture to maximize your understanding. Since material not covered in the 
readings will often be discussed in the lectures, attendance should be considered necessary (i.e. 
mandatory) to derive full benefit from the course.
 
Miscellaneous 
 The final exam will include all course material covered throughout the entire semester. It is the 
student's responsibility to attend all exams.
 A "make-up" final exam will be provided in the event of illness only with a doctor's excuse. There 
will not be a make-up mid-term exam.
 Honor and Civility: While the basic medium for the class is the traditional lecture, there 
will be 
ample opportunity for questions, experiments, and discussion. Even in the midst of disagreement, the 
classroom will be constrained by traditional views on civility and manners. Civility refers to 
politeness and manners when interacting with other people. You can show respect for your fellow 
classmates and the teacher by arriving on time and treating each other with respect even when you may 
disagree over issues under discussion.  
Course Participation Guidelines  
Participation in discussions in the classroom is a vital part of student learning. Students will be 
graded on the quality and quantity of their input. The following guidelines wIll generally be followed:

Excellent Performance -- A range
 initiates information relative to topics discussed.
 accurately exhibits knowledge of assignment content
 demonstrates excellent listening by remaining on track with classroom discussion as demonstrated by 
relevant comments and questions
 brings up questions that needs to be further explored
 clarifies points that others may not understand
 draws upon practical experience or personal opinion, as appropriate
 offers relevant and succinct input in class
 actively participates in cases and classroom exercises
 demonstrates ability to apply, analyze, evaluate, and synthesize course material
 prepares all assignments on time, thoughtfully 
 Good Performance -- B range  
 regularly participates in discussion
 shares relevant information
 gives feedback to classroom discussions
 consistently demonstrates knowledge of reading assignments
 demonstrates ability to analyze and apply course material
 demonstrated willingness to attempt to answer questions
 prepares most assignments on time with some thoughtfulness 
 Fair Performance -- C range  
 participates in group discussion when solicited
 demonstrates some knowledge of course material
 offers clear, concise information relative to class assignment
 offers input, but tends to reiterate the intuitive
 attends class regularly
 prepares most assignments on time with some thoughtfulness 
Poor Performance -- D range 
 occasional input, often irrelevant, unrelated to topic or fails to participate, even when 
specifically asked in full class or group discussions
 reluctant to share information
 does not follow the flow of ideas
 drains energy from the class
 behaves towards others in a disruptive fashion (i.e., sarcastic comments) to those who participate 
regularly
 does not attend class regularly
 fails to prepare assignments on time or with thought  
 Unacceptable Performance -- F range  
 practically never provides unsolicited input
 input tends to be irrelevant, unrelated to topic or shows a lack of preparation
 reluctant to share information
 does not follow the flow of ideas
 drains energy from the class
 behaves towards others in a disruptive fashion (i.e., sarcastic comments) to those who participate 
regularly
 does not attend class regularly
 does little more than take up space in the room
 fails to prepare assignments on time or with thought   
Additional Suggestions  
Students should always remember that participation grades are highly subjective and depend entirely on 
the professor's interpretation of your efforts. It is imperative that students make proactive efforts to 
control their participation grade. In addition to the requirements listed above, it is highly 
recommended that every student take the time to introduce himself/herself to the professor multiple 
times early in the semester. Students should make an effort to be certain that the professor knows who 
they are and how much they are working toward a good grade!
GRADING  
The following distribution will be used to allocate a letter grade to all exams, papers, and assignments 

Grade Raw Score (%)

93 - 100	A 
86 - 92	        B+ 
80 - 85 	B  
74 - 79 	C+ 
69 - 73  	C 
65 - 68 	D+ 
61 - 64 	D 
less then or equal to 60	F 
Please be advised that Loyola University Chicago does not allow instructors to assign final course 
grades of "A-", "B-" or "C-".
ADMINISTRATIVE DETAILS 
 Course withdrawal and audit statuses are options for any student in this course. Regulations 
governing 
both ultimately lie with the Registrar's Office. However, students are encouraged to consult with the 
instructor before undertaking either initiative. Audit status is only granted to students who regularly 
attend the class and participate in all but the evaluation process. A course may not be converted to 
audit after the regular change of registration period. A student who wishes to audit a course must 
register for the course as if the course were being taken for regular credit. During the change of 
registration period, the student must obtain an audit form from the office of the assistant director / 
registrar in Rome, complete it and return it to the same office.

 !!! Students having difficulty with the course are encouraged to contact me for assistance when 
difficulties emerge. Please do not wait, as difficulties will tend to compound. !! 
 Strict adherence to all college policies will be observed. 

 Econ 201  
 Introduction to Economics I (Micro)  
FALL & SPRING 
Prof. Monica Auteri 

Course Objectives: 
This is a principle course aimed at introducing the basic economic concepts of decision-making at a
micro level. In other words, we will study decisions and problems faced by individuals or firms, instead
of a whole economy. Then objectives of the course are 
 to familiarize the student with the basic concepts and methods of microeconomics -- the study of
how consumers and producers make their decisions and interact in markets, under conditions of perfect 
and
imperfect competition.
 to enable the student to apply these concepts and methods to policy issues . One important set of
policy issues is whether, when and how markets may fail and whether, when they fail, government
intervention may be needed to correct those failures.
 to lay the groundwork for future study: in the next term, for the study of macroeconomic issues
such as unemployment, inflation and long-run economic growth; and more generally for such courses as
managerial accounting and management decision-making, as well as economics courses in finance, labor, 
international economics and managerial economics, which require mastery of basic microeconomic concepts.
 
Textbook: 
PRINCIPLES OF MICROECONOMICS  by Robert H. Frank and Ben Bernanke, ISBN: 0-07-021991.

Study Guide (optional): Microeconomics Study Guide (0-07-021994-X) 
 Miscellaneous  
Student evaluation in this course will consist of assignments, mid-term 
exams, "class
participation" and a final exam with a percentage grade distribution as follows:
 Assignments......... 20%
 Participation............ 5%
 Midterm Exam 1... 20%
 Midterm Exam 2... 20%
 Final Exam........... 35%   
COURSE OUTLINE 

Thinking Like an Economist: Chapter 1 
The scarcity principle, The cost-benefit principle, Reservation prices, Opportunity cost, Rationality, 
Economic naturalism 
Appendix: Equations, graphs and tables

 Pitfalls for Decision Makers: Chapter 2 
Opportunity cost vs. sunk cost, Average vs. marginal, Fixed and variable cost

 Comparative advantage and exchange: Chapter 3 
Comparative advantage, The Production Possibilities Curve, Specialization, exchange and international 
trade.

 Supply and Demand: Chapter 4 
The principle of Equilibrium, Price controls, Markets and social welfare, The efficiency principle, 
Shifts in the demand and supply curves   

 Demand: Chapter 5 
Utility: one good, two goods, Budget line, Rational spending rule, Effects of income and other prices on 
demand, Price elasticity of demand and expenditure

 MIDTERM 1
 Supply: Chapter 6 
Perfect competition and the supply curve: from firms to market, Short run analysis, Profit maximization, 
Elasticity of supply

 Efficiency and exchange: Chapter 7 
Market equilibrium and efficiency, Total economic surplus (or Social welfare): Consumer surplus plus 
producer surplus, Revisiting price controls, Taxes and efficiency

 The invisible hand: Chapter 8 
Role of economic profit, The invisible hands theory, The invisible hand in regulated market: the market 
for the New York taxicab medallions, Market equilibrium and social optimum

 Monopoly and imperfect competition: Chapter 9 
Imperfect competition and market power, Monopolist's profit maximization, Failure of the 'Invisible 
hand', Price discrimination

 MIDTERM 2
 Strategic decision making: Chapter 10
Theory of games, Prisoners' dilemma: cartel instability, advertising games, Sequential games: credible 
threats and promises

 Externalities: Chapter 11 
External costs and benefits, The Coase theorem, Property rights and the tragedy of commons

 Economics of information: Chapter 12 
The importance of information, The role of middleman, Asymmetric information: the Lemons problem, 
Adverse selection

 Labor markets: Chapter 13 
Competitive labor market, Monopsony, Equilibrium in labor markets

 FINAL EXAM   


Econ 323 / IntS 323  
 International Economics  
FALL 
Prof. Monica Auteri 
Prerequisites:
 Junior Standing
 Principles of Economics I (Micro)
 Principles of Economics II (Macro) 
 Recommended: 
 Microeconomics  
Course Objectives: 
The goal of this course is to present an introduction to the theory of international trade, trade 
policy, exchange rates and balance of payments.  Economic integration and open-economy policy issues 
will also be discussed.  Concepts covered during the course will enliven classroom discussions 
considering current economic events. 
We will try to answer the following questions: 
 Why countries gain from international trade
 Why we have trade restrictions
 How exchange rates are determined
 What is the EU?  
Required Course Text: 
Krugman and Obstfeld,  International Economics  
 Miscellaneous 
Student evaluation in this course will consist of assignments, one mid-term
exam, "class
participation" and a final exam with a percentage grade distribution as follows:
 Assignments......... 20%
 Participation........... 15%
 Midterm Exam ...... 20%
 Final Exam........... 45%   
COURSE SCHEDULE & READINGS 

 Weeks 1 & 2 
 I. INTERNATIONAL TRADE THEORY 
 Labor Productivity and Comparative Advantage: The Ricardian Model
 Specific Factors and Income Distribution 
 Week 3 
 Resources and Trade: The Heckscher-Ohlin Model
 The Standard Trade Model
 Economies of Scale, Imperfect Competition, and International Trade
 International Factor Movements 
 Weeks 4 & 5 
 II. INTERNATIONAL TRADE POLICY 
 The Instruments of Trade Policy
 The Political Economy of Trade Policy
 Trade Policy in Developing Countries
 Strategic Trade Policies in Advanced Countries 
 Weeks 6 - 9 
 III. EXCHANGE RATES AND OPEN-ECONOMY MACROECONOMICS 
 National Income Accounting and the Balance of Payments
 Exchange Rates and the Foreign Exchange Market: An Asset
 Money, Interest Rates, and Exchange Rates
 Price Levels and the Exchange Rate in the Long Run
 Output and the Exchange Rate in the Short Run
 Fixed Exchange Rates and Foreign Exchange Intervention  
 Weeks 10 - 13 
 IV. INTERNATIONAL MACROECONOMIC POLICY 
 Optimum Currency Areas and the European Experience    
 
 Econ 326 / IntS 326  
 Comparative Economic Systems  
SPRING 
Prof. Monica Auteri 
Prerequisites:
 Junior Standing
 Principles of Economics I (Micro) 
Course Objective: 
This course will analyze and explain economic systems using standard supply, demand, and cost analysis, 
along with property rights.  It will focus on how organizational arrangements combine with economic 
policies in distinct natural and historical settings to influence economic performance and welfare. 
Required Course Text: 
Richard L. Carson,  Comparative Economic Systems  
 Miscellaneous 
Student evaluation in this course will consist of a project, one mid-term
exam, "class
participation" and a final exam with a percentage grade distribution as follows:
 Project............... 20%
 Participation........... 15%
 Midterm Exam ...... 20%  
 Final Exam........... 45%   
COURSE SCHEDULE & READINGS 

 Weeks 1 & 2 
 A. Introduction to Comparative Economic Systems: Property Rights 
 Harold Demsetz, "Toward a Theory of Property Rights,"  American Economic Review,  May, 1967. 
(On Library Reserve.)
 Introduction to Property Rights ( Carson, Chapter 1, Appendix): 
 Property Rights and Ownership
 Property Rights and Exclusion
 Property Rights and Efficiency
 A Brief Introduction to Property Rights and Socialism
 Appendix 
 Week 3 - 5 
 B. The Role of the State 
 The Traditional Soviet-type Economy (Carson, Chapter 2) 
 The Notion of Planning
 Centralization vs. Decentralization
 Organization and Motivation 
 Political Rights and the Role of Government in a Market Economy (Carson, Chapter 3) 
 The Political Dimension of an Economic System
 Social Insurance
 Expansion of the Public Sector in Market Economies
 Industrial Policy in a Mixed Economy
 Per-Capita GNP in Developed, Transition, and Rapidly Growing Asian Economies   
 Weeks 6 - 9 
 C. Capitalism in an Historical Context 
 Roots of Modern Economic Systems (Carson, Chapter 4) 
 An Hypothesis of Historical Development
 Pre-Capitalist Economies
 The Emergence of Markets and of Nation States 
 Two Views of the Evolution of Modern Capitalism (Carson, Chapter 5) 
 Marx on the Evolution of Modern Capitalism
 The Excess Supply of Labor under Capitalism
 Schumpeter's Theory of Capitalist Development
 On the Symmetry between Soviet-type and "Free Market" Economies 
 Weeks 10 - 13 
 D. The Transition from an STE to a Market Economy 
 Varieties of Socialism and Pretransition Efforts to  Reform Soviet-type Economies (Carson, Chapter 
6) 
 The Socialist System Envisaged by Marx and Engels 
 Basic Forms of Socialism
 Efforts to Reform Soviet-type Economies
 Reasons for Reform Efforts and Reform Failures
 Perestroika
 Concluding Comments: The Outcome of Perestroika 
 The Problem of Transition from a Soviet-type to a Market Economy (Carson, Chapter 7) 
 Introduction: The Nature of the Transition Problem
 Sequencing of Reforms in Gradual Transition
 Gradual Transition vs. "Big Bang"
 The Effect of Freeing Prices in a Transition Economy
 The Soft Budget Constraint and the Nature of Financial Markets in Transition Economies
 Conclusion: The Current Status of Transition     




FnAr 114  
 Painting I  
On-Site & In-Studio 
FALL & SPRING 
Artist Giovanni Tommasi-Ferroni
General Description  
Since this course deals with painting, and since it is given in Rome, it will take into consideration 
the rich background of the City layered as it is with Ancient, Medieval, Renaissance, and Baroque.  
Before we begin we will have a discussion, first - of materials, then - of the elements of design 
because we should be aware of Line, Shape, Texture, Value, Volume, and Color.  These are not difficult 
to understand, but they will be important if the student is to try to render what will be before his/her 
eyes. 

Students are encouraged to bring whatever drawing materials they like to use.  If a student has not had 
much experience, a sketchbook 8.5" x 11" and a soft ebony pencil are sufficient to begin. Other 
materials can be experimented with later.  We will discuss the various properties of painting in 
Watercolor, Acrylic, and Oil, both on paper and on canvas.  It is best to work on a modest 
scale not larger than 11" x 14" for drawings and not larger than 18" x 24" for paintings, although once 
paintings are dry they can be rolled ( a bulky cumbersome portfolio can be a problem when traveling ). 

