
Civil War Women - Internet Sources


CIVIL  WAR  WOMEN
Primary Sources on the Internet


Diaries, Letters, Documents | 
Photographs and Prints

As a result of the Duke bibliography 
Women and the Civil War, we consistantly receive requests from students and teachers who would like to 
see primary sources on this topic available to th em via the Internet.  In response, we have begun to 
transcribe and scan some of our manuscript collections which document women's experiences in the Civil War.  
Given the wealth of information about the Civil War already on the Internet, there is a relatively small 
amount of material that reflects women's lives and experiences during this time period.  Below are links to 
primary sources on the Internet that are directly related to women and the Civil War.  We encourage 
archivists, project staff, and Civil War enthusists to network more women's collections!
Tell us about other sites to add to this list!


DIARIES, LETTERS, and other DOCUMENTS
Alice Williamson Diary, 1864
Diary of a 16 year old rebel girl living in Gallatin, Tennessee during Union occupation of the area.  
Transcription and scanned image of original document held by the Special Collections Library at Duke 
Unversity.
Rose O'Neal Greenhow Papers, 1861-1864
Letters from Greenhow, a Confederate spy, to Jefferson Davis, Alexander Boteler, and others regarding war 
activites.  Also several newspaper articles describing her imprisionment in 1861 and her death in 1864.  
Transcriptions and scanned images of original documents held in the Special Collections Library at Duke 
University.  Another site specializing in military history provides 
information on 
Greenhow's war contributions as well as 
a picture and 
brief biographical caption.
Rachel Cormany Diary, June 14-July 6, 1863
An excerpt of this Franklin County, PA., woman's diary describing the town of Chambersburg during the 
Gettysburg campaign.  Taken fromThe Cormany Diaries: A Northern Family in the Civil War, James 
C. Mohr, editor, Richard E. Winslow, III, assistant editor, (Pittsburg, University of Pittsburg Press, 1982),
pp. 328-341.  Part of the Valley
of the Shadow project.
Carrie Berry Diary August 1, 1864-January 4, 1865
Passages from the diary of a 10 yr. old Atlanta girl describe the immediate affects of the War on her and her 
family.  Transcription of original diary provided by the Atlanta Historical Center.
At Gettysburg, or What a Girl Saw and Heard of the Battle
A narrative by Tillie Allerman.  Electronic text of a book originally published in 1889.
Civil War Reminiscences by Catharine Hunsecker
Transcription of a narrative which gives some general information about Hunsecker's life, but mainly focuses 
on the events of the Civil War and the affect it had on her community in Franklin County, PA.  Part of the 
Valley of the Shadow project.
Sallie Seeper Scott Letter, April 15, 1865
Transcription of a love letter from Sallie Seeper Scott of "Lower Chanceford" (state unknown), to Robert 
Bennett, Chief Carpenter Shop in Washington, D.C.  Original held in the Special Collections Department of the 
University Libraries at Virginia Tech.  Part of their on-line collection of 
American Civil War Resources.
Memoir of Alansa Rounds Sterrett, c.1859-1865.
Transcription of original memoir housed in the the Augusta County Historical Society.  Alansa Rounds Sterrett 
was Jedediah Hotchkiss' niece and a teacher at Loch Willow Academy during the Civil War. A Northerner, Alansa 
Rounds married Franklin F. Sterrett, a friend of Hotchkiss' and a Confederate cavalry officer.  Part of the 
Valley of the Shadow project.
10th South Carolina Ladies Auxilary
This is a website for Civil War "re-enactresses" that contains a wealth of primary source information about 
women during the war.  Site includes links to several WPA memoirs of South Carolina women during the war, 
detailed information about fashion and fabrics of the times, and a bibliography of suggested readings.
The Ladies Union Aid Society of St. Louis
Produced by a women's Civil War reenacting group, this site provides a history of the LUAS which contains 
excerpts from original documents related to the creation and work of the Society.  Includes references to 
specific women such as Anna Clapp and Jesse Freement, but also illustrates the work of the many unnamed women 
who aided soldiers.  Also has a bibliography for further reading.
Nancy Emerson Diary, 1862
Memoranda of events and thoughts of woman living in Augusta County, Virginia.  Transcription and scanned 
images of the original manuscript diary held in the Alderman Library at the University of Virginia.  Part of 
the Valley of the Shadow project.
PHOTOGRAPHS and PRINTS
The Library of Congress and the 
National Archives
 have scanned hundreds of photographs relating to the Civil War.  While only a small percentage of these 
photos actually depict women (see below), other photographs may provide useful supplementary information or 
illustrations for women-focused projects.  For instance, photos show towns where women lived and battles and 
events often described in women's diaries and letters.  Each of the following images specifically include
women:

From the Library of Congress' American Memory Project
Note:  Because of the way the American Memory Project photographs are set up, we cannot provide direct 
links to each of the photos listed.  To access the following photos, simply 
go to the Library of Congress Civil War Search Page, 
and search on any of the words in the following picture captions.  Or search on words like women, 
girls, nurses, or lady.

Port Royal Island, SC.  African American preparing cotton for the gin on Smith's plantation in 1861.
Cedar Mt., VA.  Family group before the house in which Gen. Charles S. Winder (C.S.A.) died, 1862.
Fugitive African Americans fording the Rappahannock River (VA) in 1862.
Falmouth, Va. Group in front of post office tent at Army of the Potomac headquarters, April 1863 
Stevensburg, Va. Gen. Judson Kilpatrick, 3d Division, Cavalry Corps, with ladies and staff members on the porch of headquarters, March 1864
Brandy Station, VA.  Officers and a lady at headquarters of the 1st Brigade, Horse Artillary, 1864.
Brandy Station, VA.  Col. John C. Coxe, A.C.S., and a lady seated before his log cabin winterquarters at the Army of the Potomac headquarters in 1864.
Fort Monrow, VA.  Officers and ladies on porch of a garrison house, 1864.
Fredericksburg, Va. Nurses and officers of the U.S. Sanitary Commission, 1864
Washington, D.C.  Group before office of the U.S. Christian Commission in 1865.
City Point, VA.  Brig. Gen. John A. Rawlins, Chief of Staff, with wife & child at door of their quarters, ca. 1860-1865. 
Portrait of Maj. Gen. George B. McClellan, officer of the Federal Army, and his wife,
Ellen Mary Marcy, between 1860 and 1865
Petersburg, Va. Cottage of Col. Nathaniel Michler, U.S. Engineers, at Bryant house, 1865 (woman sitting in front of cottage) 
Richmond, Va. St. John's Church and graveyard from street, 1865 (inlcudes a girl).
Washington, D.C. The four condemned conspirators (of the Lincoln assasination) Mrs. Mary E. Surratt, Payne, Herold, Atzerodt, with officers and others on the scaffold; guards on the wall, July 1865
Washington, D.C. Gen. John F. Hartranft reading the death warrant to the conspirators on the scaffold, July 1865 
Washington, D.C. Adjusting the ropes for hanging the conspirators, July 1865 
Washington, D.C. Hanging hooded bodies of the four conspirators; crowd departing, July 1865
Washington, D.C. Hanging bodies of the conspirators; guards only in yard, July 1865


To Duke Special Collections Library | 
To Women and the Civil War Bibliography



Compiled by
Ginny Daley
6/96


