

Gender and Media in South Asia - Syllabus Spring 1998 - Ruhi Grover


   
  Syllabus - University of Virginia - Spring 1998
Net Resources
 Gender and Media in South Asia
  Instructor: Ruhi Grover. Email: rgm2k@virginia.edu
 Course number: Drama 283
  Location/Time: Cabell 241 / T & Th. 9:30-10:45
The interplay and contradiction between the images and the reality of gender identity in
South Asia continues to raise concerns of representation.  This course deals with the
construction of gender identities, and explores some essentializing 
categories--traditional vs. modern, oppression vs. liberation--that have been used to understand the
position of women (and men) in South Asia.  One way of doing this is by examining
the way in which media--both visual and print--has treated gender, and the extent to
which it has been able to disseminate the "truth" or capture the "real lives" of women
in the economic and social sphere.  In sum, this course highlights how images and
representations of gender illustrate a South Asian understanding of itself. 
Requirements

*Class participation (20 %)

* Midterm (30 %)

* Final - A 10-page paper on any issue that is discussed in class.  The students will
have to refer to relevant films, newspapers, and magazines for this paper (50 %)

This will also include a class presentation of the final paper.
Readings
Mrinal Pande. The subject is woman. New Delhi, Sanchar Publishing House, 1990.
Meera Kosambi ed. Women's oppression in the public gaze: an analysis of newspaper 
	coverage, state action and activist response.  Bombay, Research Center for 
	Women's University, 1994
Ammu Joseph & Kalpana Sharma eds. Whose News? The Media and Women's Issues.
 	Delhi, Sage Publications, 1994
Prabha Krishnan & Anita Dighe. Affirmation and Denial: Construction of Feminity on
 	Indian Television. Delhi, Sage Publications, 1990.
Vimal Balasubrahmanyan. Mirror Image: The Media and the Women's Question.
  	Bombay, Centre for Education and Documentation, 1988.
Classes --
January 15: Introduction: problematizing gender and media

Jan. 20:	Women in media 

 		Reading: Mrinal Pande, The subject is woman.  New Delhi, Sanchar 		Pub. House, 1990

 		Arjun Appadurai & Carol Breckeridge, "public modernity in India," 
		CR 
		[CR= Clemons Library Reserve materials]

Jan. 22: Why media?  

 		Reading: Usha Reddi, "Media and Culture in Indian Society: Conflict or 
		Co-operation?" CR

		Graham Murdoch, "Communications and the cost of modernity." CR

Jan. 27: 	The visual medium: cinema

		women, nation, and the outsider in Indian cinema

		film clippings: mother India; coolie; saaz (based on Lata Mangeshkar 
		and Asha Bhonsle)

Jan. 29: 	Discussion of the films and readings

 		Readings: Leela Rao, "woman in Indian films - a paradigm of continuity
		& change;"

  		Rosie Thomas, "melodrama and the negotiation of morality in 
			mainstream hindi films."

 		Aruna Vasudeva, "The woman: vamp or victim"

 		Rita Manchanda, "hype and heroines: is the new..."

Feb. 3: 	The public and the private

 		Film: Bandit Queen

Feb. 5: 	Discuss the film

  		Readings: Molly Heskel, "From reverence to rape," pp. 505-534, CR

 
Madhu Kishwar, "The Bandit Queen," Manushi, no. 84, Sept.-Oct.
 		1994, CR

Feb 10: 	S. Asian women filmmakers abroad

 		Gurinder Chadha

 		What do you call an Indian woman who's funny?" VHS8431

 		Interview with Mira Nair, Newstrack, April 1992

 Feb. 12: 	Documenting success stories

 		film: Kamala and Raji: working women of SEWA

 Feb. 17: 	Zooming into the private

 		Dadi's family

 Feb. 19: 	Discuss the documentaries

 		Readings: SEWA: Women in Movement, CR

 Feb. 24: 	Television in a new avatar

 		Newstrack: Jan. 1990, "Media: unmuzzling Doordarshan and AIR"

 		Newstrack: May 1992, "Media Revolution: Glasnost at last"

 		Readings: A. Rajagopal, "The rise of national programming: the case of 
		Indian television." CR

 		Arvind Rajagopal, "Mediating Modernity" CR


 Feb. 26: 	Construction of feminity on television

 		Reading: Prabha Krishnan and Anita Dighe, Affirmation and Denial 

		Mary Ellen Brown, "Introduction: Feminist Cultural Television 
			Criticism - Culture, Theory and Practice," "Conclusion: Consumption 
			and Resistance - The Problem of Pleasure." CR 	

 March 3: 	Is the media bias?

 		Readings: "re-marketing the whore," "hidden face of patriarchy," 
		"struggling for space," "action for change"

 		John Corner, "television in theory," CR

 		* Mid-term will be distributed in class 

 March 5: 	Reading between the lines: newspaper coverage

 		Reading: Whose News? Dowry, Rape, the Shah bano Controversy

 		Newstrack: August 89 "final push over the edge," TOI Sesquicentennial

 * mid-term papers due
 SPRING BREAK
 March 17: 	Newspaper coverage (continued)

 		Female Foeticide, Roop Kanwar Tragedy

 March 19: 	Magazine scene

 		India Today, Cosmopolitan, Stardust, Manushi, (Kanwal to send 
		magazines)

 		Reading: "Birthing Terrible Beauties," EPW, vol. 26, no. 43, 1991

March 24 : 	Dalda 13: First woman photo-journalist in India

 March 26: 	Women in media

 		Newstrack: June 1990: Kiran Bedi, Shabana Azmi

 		Newstrack: Oct. 1991: Shobha De

 		Sept. 1992: Medha Patekar

 		PRESENTATIONS IN CLASS

 March 31: 	Urvashi Butalia, "English textbooks, Indian Publishers." CR

 April 2: 	Advertizing a "product." 

 		Reading: Prabha Krishnan, "Applauding Servility: Images of women in
 		advertisements." Nandini Prasad, "Commercial advertising and 
	            portrayal of women." CR  Read Times of India sesquicentennial 
		publication of advertisements.

 April 7: 	Radio: A woman's place on the air?

 April 9: 	Changing Media history through women's history

 April 14: 	Students will present their papers

 April 16: 	  - do-

 April 21: 	 - do-

 April 23: 	 - do-

 April 28: 	Summing up: Communication and the public sphere		

 		Reading: John Keane, "Structural transformations of the public sphere." 
		CR

Back to the top


Back to Teaching Resources


