                    George Mason University
               School of Business Administration
                        Course Syllabus
MIS 491  Leveraging the Information Superhighway--A Business
Perspective
Spring Term 1995                        Tuesdays 1920-2130

Class Venues: George Mason University and American Management
Systems, Inc., Fairfax
Instructors:  Stephen Ruth (RUTH), Professor of Technology
Management and Mel Aclaro, Graduate Research Associate,
Office: Room 463 Robinson Phone: 703-993 1789 (O) 536 4121
(FAX) Office Hours: By appointment Network Assistance : Nils
Johanssen (NJOHANSS); Mel Aclaro (MACLARO) Keke Tan (KTAN);
Glen Poplowski (GPOPLAWS); Anna Ogudova (AOGUDOVA) all on
OSF1
Organizational Sponsors: American Management Systems, Inc.,
GMU Center for Science, Trade and Technology Policy, GMU
International Center for Applied Studies in MIS, The Internet
Society, GMU Instructional Development Office
Individual Sponsors:  Ms. Judy Cohen and Mr. Lewis Parks,
American Management Systems, Inc.; Dr. J. T. Ratchford,
Director, CSTTP; Dr. Stephen Ruth, Director, ICASMIS; Mr.
Anthony Rutkowski, Executive Director, The Internet Society,
Drs. Randy Gabel and John O'Conner, co-directors, IDO
Course Description:  This course places the student squarely
in the middle of a trillion dollar annual global business--
the communications industry--and takes aim at a significant
and still unanswered question: "How can businesses extract
major profit and efficiencies from the so-called Information
Superhighway?".

     An article in Fortune disclosed that the metropolitan DC
region has over 1,400 companies that work directly in this
industry, nearly as many as in Silicon Valley and far more
than in the technology corridor flanking the Boston area.  So
learning the issues surrounding the leveraging of
international networking has more than just academic
importance--it may have an effect on your job search.

     This is a difficult and challenging course.  We will be
using many of the newest techniques and technologies to
navigate the networks.  But navigation is only a small part
of this course. We must do more than simply sight-see.
Businesses demand, and this course demands, that networks be
harnessed to productive use.  Therefore we will be
concentrating on extracting value--using the Internet and
many other networks for research, data bases, sources of new
information, improving current business practices, etc.  We
will be using the network nearly every day in this course.
The Learning Process: Practice, Study, Teamwork and Discovery
Practice--Throughout the course we will be practicing with
network services and capabilities.  Most of this practice
will be an individual task but there will be help from a
large team of skilled users whom you can call on when there
is a problem.  There are vast help resources on the network
too, from user's groups to files of Frequently Asked
Questions (FAQ's). It will be imperative to success in the
course that each member of the class develop the needed
skills--and that takes a lot of practice.
Study--The course requires mastery of the basic concepts of
telecommunications.  This will be attained through the use of
the Stamper text.  Each week one or two chapters must be
completed and chapter questions answered and submitted.  A
detailed course workbook is also to be maintained by each
student.  This loose leaf notebook  contains lecture notes,
insights from outside reading, Internet transaction comments,
articles from newspapers and journals, etc.
Teamwork-- Under the right conditions, networks can
facilitate teamwork. Several class projects will aim to
deliver specific course results by active collaboration of
students in focused team tasks.   The emphasis on these tasks
will be the network as a medium to deliver results faster and
better than traditional approaches allow.  So, even though
many of the teams will not be meeting much face-to-face to
plan their group project (much of the interaction should be
on the net), the results could be superior to the normal
approach.
Discovery--It is becoming clear that the old models of
teaching are not going to be sufficient in today's
environment.  The student is not simply a vessel that needs
to be filled with facts.  Learning is better facilitated
through discovery than through piling on of statistics and
theories.  In this course there will be several features that
aim to facilitate the discovery process:

1.  Classes will not always be held in classrooms--there will
    be considerable open ended discussion on the network.

2.  The methods of delivery will require many media--not just
    a lecture.  We will be using television, audio cassettes,
    CDROM's--possibly video uplinks to get the material to
    you.  Hypertext links to weekly notes and comments will
    be a routine method of communicating and all students
    will be expected to use this capability to remain current
    on changing aspects of the course.
3.  The methods of communicating with the instructors will
    also be varied.   In addition to traditional office hours
    at GMU campus there will also be "virtual" offices set up
    so that students can discuss individual and group issues
    using the media that are suitable for that purpose.

4.  Assignments will be given primarily through the
    hypertext-based system specially set up for the course.
    Syllabus, weekly notes, student exercises, notes, some
    discussion groups, etc. will all be accessable on a round
    the clock basis through GMU's OSF1 system.

5.  Examinations will be open ended questions that require
    integration of course concepts rather than repeating
    memorized facts.   Detailed note keeping will still be an
    essential part of the discovery process.

      This is a unique course and a unique venue.  It takes
place at the facilities of one of the industry leaders in
innovative approaches to business problems.  It is sponsored
by AMS, the Internet Society, ICASMIS, IDO and George Mason
University's new Center for Science, Trade and Technology
Policy.  It features guest speakers from government, business
and education.  Like any course in the School of Business
Administration, this one requires careful preparation of
assignments, high quality research and an individual
commitment to a high standard of work.  The challenge for the
students in this class will be to maintain focus and to take
full advantage of the abundant resources offered.
Objectives : Four topic objectives will be integrated into
this course:
Extensive Experience in a Wide Range of Networking Tools and
Techniques. During the first weeks of the course a series of
tasks will be assigned to enable each member of the class to
become deeply familiar with the tools of local networks and
particularly with the capabilities, and limitations, of the
worldwide Internet.  These tasks will not be toy problems and
a few trivial examples--we will endeavor to make a powerful
connection to the network--a connection that will greatly
facilitate the learning needed in the rest of the course.
Overview of Crucial Business Issues in Telecommunications
Throughout the course, the assigned readings and the speakers
will introduce some of the key challenges facing businesses
in attempting to harness this technology to their advantage.
Domestic and International Competitiveness Issues  The third
objective is to give a sense of the international dimensions
of this subject.  We will examine the impact of global
standards, international treaty agreements, the role of the
PTT's and many other topics.
Integration of Telecommunications Concepts into Other
Information Technology Decisions  Throughout the course there
will be emphasis on the common threads that unite
Telecommunications with other IT topics that have been
presented in your studies so far.  For example, the emergence
of Asyncronous Transfer Mode (ATM) as a common transmission
mode involves business decisions concerning MIS, data base
integrity, security, etc. and involves cost and benefit
tradeoffs like any other significant IT decision.
Assignments: The selection of assignments is based on
providing each student with the breadth needed to take
advantage of the rich array of resources offered but, most
important, to offer a challenging academic experience. There
is no other course quite like this offered at the university
--so deciding on assignments requires a non-traditional
approach.  The first half of the course stresses mastery of
the telecommunications basics and extensive use of a wide
range of network resources.  Weekly assignments require
keeping up to date and turning in answers to assigned
questions at regular intervals.  During the second half the
emphasis will be on the research component of the course,
with each person aiming at an individual or group topic in
addition to keeping up with the weekly lectures and directed
readings.  The speakers emphasize industry practice and the
texts plus occasional extra readings give a good overview of
the concepts that surround human engineering and data
communications.  One complements the other.
Course Grade: The grade will be based completion of a series
of four tasks that my students sometimes refer to as the
Labors of Hercules.

1. There will be an exam consisting of ten questions with
answers due at intervals during the course.  (25%).  Exam
questions will be integrative and will cover lectures and
readings.

2. A research paper related to course-related  materials
(30%) is due at the end of the course.   The topic selected
must be worked out jointly between the student and the
professor and a detailed outline  will be required in late
March.

3. A demanding set of about a dozen Internet projects will be
assigned throughout the course (25%)

4. Finally, 20% of the grade will be based on the completion
of the assigned questions, objective and essay, at the end
each chapter of the Stamper text.  Objective questions are to
be answered on Scantron forms and discussion questions in
your notebooks.  Answers are due one week after the
assignment; that is, Chapter 1 and 2 questions are due on
February 7th.  All these questions can be answered on your
own time in a stress-free environment but must be completed
on time.  Based on others' experience about 4-5 hours per
week will be required for this, perhaps more.  The course
notebook will also contribute to this grade.
A Caution:  For students who are accustomed to courses where
all tasks are clearly set out within the confines of a book
or workbook this course will be initially unsettling.
Students will be given as much help as possible in using
facilities, locating  MOSAIC or Netscape servers,
establishing research topics, learning to use the Internet,
etc.  However, the reason for the course's continuing
popularity, according to over one hundred students who have
experienced it, is that general guidance is given and the
student is set at liberty to find the most expeditious way to
complete tasks.  For example, students will need to use
autodidact materials to learn how to leverage the Internet,
MOSAIC, Gopher, etc.  There will be five student assistants
available on the network to help (an unusually large help
staff) but they can only answer specific questions based on
your use of the net.  Similarly, the end of chapter questions
in the textbook  are straightforward and can be worked on
independently. Since some assignment or task is due nearly
every week it is absolutely crucial that each person in the
course immediately establish regular study habits and a
commitment to spend the required time needed to be successful
in this course.
How Much Time is Required for This Course?  Depending on your
previous background, this course will require between 8 and
12 hours per week outside of class, about average for an
upper level elective course.  For some, even more time may be
required.  For a few, much less.  Surprisingly, the students
who are already proficient in data communications or computer
principles are frequently not as successful in this type of
course as those who are learning for the first time.  The key
is mastering all facets of the course and studying each in
its appropriate context.
Completing Assigned Work On Time: It will be the
responsibility of each student or group to submit assigned
work on time. For group projects work must be shared equally.
It is acceptable to submit work early, in case of an
anticipated absence, for example.

 Course Schedule

Date Assignment   Guest Speakers/Topics

1/24          Professor Ruth: Introduction to a New Learning
              Paradigm: A Business Telecommunications
              Perspective
              Mr. Aclaro: Internet exercises: Pine, OSF1,
              UNIX
1/31  S 1-2   Professor Ruth: Overview of Networking
              Principles
              Mr. Aclaro: Class exercises on the Information
              Superhighway-the "dirty dozen"
2/7   S 3;    Professor Ruth: Leveraging Information Highways
              Mr. Aclaro: Advanced Network Services; Part 1

              Class Web server operational
2/14  S 4;    Professor Ruth: Human Engineering-Interface
              Issues
              Mr. Aclaro: Advanced Network Services; Part 2
2/21  S 5-6   Guest: Dr. Jerrold Grochow, AMS
              Topic: Doing Business on the Information
              Superhighway: a Fortune 1000 Perspective
              Professor Ruth: The Negroponte Switch and Other
              Key Ideas in Telecommunications

              Class SLIP conection operational
2/28  S 7-8;  Guest: Dr. Rajendra Sisodia, Associate
              Professor of Marketing, George Mason University
              Topic: Winners and Losers in the
              Telecommunications Marketplace: a View
              from the Year 2000

              Initial review of notebooks
3/7           Guest: Ms. Pam Promisel, AMS
              Topic: Business Issues in EDI
3/14  S 9-10; Spring Break
3/21          No class--individual consultations on term
              project
3/28  S 11-12 Guest: Mr. Wayne Rash, Columnist, Systems
              Integrator, International Business Issues in
              Data Communications: A Report from the G7
              (Mr. Rash will be covering the Brussels G7
              talks from a telecommunications perspective for
              the Washington Post)
4/4   S 13-14 Dr. Brad Cox, George Mason University: Taming
              the Electronic Frontier

              Professor Ruth : The Sociology of
              Data Communications
4/11  S 15-16 Guest: Mr. Dan Michaelis,  Bell Atlantic
              Topic: New Bottom Line Issues in Telephony
4/18  S 17    Guest:  Ms. Judy Cohen, AMS, Electronic
              Communications at AMS
              Guest: Mr. Carl Petitt, AMS, Multimedia and
              Evolution of the User Interface
4/25  S 16-17 Mr. Lewis Parks, AMS, and Mr. John Townsend,
              Martin Marietta. Topic: Leveraging the New
              Training Technologies
5/2           Final review of notebooks.

Note:  Responses to objective questions for Stamper chapters
are to be submitted not later than one week after they are
assigned; hence, on February 7th,  Chapter 1 and 2 questions
are due.
Key Dates:  2/28 Internet Projects 1-6 completed; course
notebooks collected (to be returned following week); 3/7 Exam
questions 1-3 due; 3/21 Preliminary outline of research paper
due; 3/28 Exam questions 4-6 due; 4/4 Final outline of
research paper due; 4/18 Internet projects 7-12 completed;
5/2 Exam questions 7-10 due; course notebooks collected (to
be returned following week); 5/9 Research paper due

Required Texts:

Stamper, Business Data Communications, Third Edition, 1995,
Benjamin Cummings (S)
Rais, Mark, The Essential Guide to OS1, 1995
Optional Texts (Suggest at least one of the following):
Eddings, How the Internet Works, ZD Press 1994
Ellsworth, Education on the Internet, Sams,  1994
Fisher and Tidrow, Riding the Internet Highway, 1994
Fraase, The PC Internet Tour Guide, Ventana Press, 1994
Hahn and Stout, The Internet Yellow Pages, Osborne, Mc Graw
Hill, 1994
Hedke, Using Computer Bulletin Boards, MIS Press, 1994
Hardy, Internet Mailing Lists, PTR Prentice Hall, 1994
Internet Unleashed, SAMS Publishing, 1994
Kehoe, Zen and the Art of Internet, Prentice Hall, 1994
Levine and Young, Internet for Dummies, IDG Books, 1994
Levine and Young, More Internet for Dummies, IDG Books, 1994
Maxwell and Grycz, New Riders' Official Internet Yellow
Pages, NRP 1994
Krol, The Whole Internet Users Guide and Catalog, O'Reilly,
1994
Notess, Internet Access Providers, Mecklermedia, 1994
Pocket Guides to the Internet, Mecklermedia, 1994
Sachs and Stair, Hands-On Internet, PTR Prentice Hall, 1994
Tolhurst, et al, Using the Internet, QUE, 1994
 

Network Project 1: Using the Network--Getting Started: First
take about an hour or two to practice some of the tasks in
Rais Chapters I-III, IV, and IX-XI.  Practice with Pine and
demonstrate that you can do the following basic functions:
save, write, reply, send attach and create distribution
lists.  Take extensive notes in your notebook. Then take an
hour to get used to what most students find a very enjoyable
part of the network--network news groups.  Let Rais guide you
through the TIN procedure and get registered on a few News
groups of your preference.  (You can also contact Mark Rais
on the net at  MRAIS for a little extra help if necessary) .
Then read the attached article from the Washington Post.
"It's Easy to Navigate an On Line Field Trip to Capital
Hill".  There are almost twenty addresses you can call on.
Try them all.  When you have finished (be sure to take
detailed notes in your notebooks) write a 500 word paper
discussing your results. Project is due February 6th.

last updated: 1/25/95 by maclaro@osf1.gmu.edu