
Questions and Issues in Basic Writing & Computing 




8(3), August 1991, pages 63-81

Questions and Issues in Basic Writing
& Computing


Pamela Gay


The emphasis of most studies of basic writers and computing in
the 1980s was on the power of the computer to effect change--the
computer was considered a neutral writing tool with a power of
its own. While basic writers who typically have negative attitudes
toward writing may have the most to gain from using a word-processing
package, results of those studies showed the computer alone did
not empower developing writers and suggested the learning context
for that group is especially important.

Although there have been several reviews of the effects of word
processing on various groups of writers, there has been no systematic
review of research on college-level writers. Using Hawisher's
(1988, 1989c) research framework as a model, I reviewed 18 studies
(1984-1990) that report some effects of word processing on college
basic writers. (See Table 1.) I begin my critical review by presenting
the findings with regard to two effects: attitude and the quality
of writing performance. Then I go on to discuss pedagogy and the
problem (and importance) of defining basic writers, and I end
by suggesting research directions that can help move us toward
a new pedagogy, thus expanding our knowledge, our knowing, and
as Ann Berthoff (1981) would say, our teaching and learning.

 

Table 1: Survey of Research on College Basic Writers & Word Processing (1984-1990)


Study
Arkin & Gallagher (1984)
Beserra (1986)
Cross (1990)
Cullen (1988)
Deming (1987)
Deutsch (1988)

Research Design:


  Duration
Several
 10 wks
3 qtrs
10 wks
 
  Sample #
courses
6
36
24
1 course

  Method
Explor.
C. study
C. study
C. study
Exper.
Exper.

Tools:


  Software
Wordstar
 Bank Street Writer (1982)
HBJ Writer (WANDAH)
Bank Street Writer
 
  Hardware
  Apple IIe
IBM PC
Apple IIe
 
Research Participants Background
  2nd level BW, Ohio State, ACT=16 or less + placement exam
Lowest group underprep. writers - UCLA, affirm act., bi-ling. or ad. ESL
Urban university
 
Writing Task
 2 modes: 1 personal & 1 transactional
Essays
3-5 page expository essays & shorter wr.
4 in-class expo. essays
"papers"

Assessment
Informal
Pre- & post-tests, holistic, videotapes & stimulated recall
Interviews and observations in and out of class
Videotapes & stimulated recall
Pre-  & post-test, holistic, revision scheme, anxiety survey
Pre-test, post-test, holistic

Pedagogy:


  Word Processing
  2 hands-on sessions by instructor, limited access
Brief training, generous access
  
  Writing
Process & collab. 1, peer review
Out of class for study
Process, mult. drafts, wr. workshop
Process; cross-curricular college reading & wr. revision
Process, emph. revision
Process

Results:


  Improved Attitude
X
XX
X
 X

  Increased Fluency
X
X 
   
  Improved Product
X
Some but not dramatic
No
XNo
Slightly







Table 1 (continued): Survey of Research on College Basic Writers
& Word Processing (1984-1990)

Study
Etchison (1989)
Goldsmith & Robertson (1988)
Hawisher & Fortune (1988)
Hult (1986)
Hunter (1984)
King ,Birnbaum, & Wageman (1984)

Research Design:


  Duration
1 Semester
several semesters
1 Semester
1 course
1 course
1 semester

  Sample #
approx. 11
4-500/smstr.
40
 16
10

  Method
Exper.
Survey
Exper.
Explor.
Explor.
Exper.

Tools:


  Software
PC-WRITE
 Wordstar
Select
PIE
Bank Street Writer (Old)

  Hardware
IBM PC
Varied
Zenith Micro
DE Rainbow
Heathkit 89
Apple IIe

Research Participants Background
30% minority, large cities; 70% from central W. Va., econ. depressed, ACT=15 or less
 Black & Hispanic, 2 large Midwest Universities, ACT=16.9 mean (exp.) & 17.4 (control)
 Diverse: from private, suburban, & small town schools
All happened to be female

Writing Task
Transactional; 1 explanatory, 1 persuasive
 Transactional essays based on readings
 Paragraphs
Position Paper

Assessment
Pre-test, Post-test, holistic
Informal
Pre-test, Post-test, holistic
Informal
Informal, analytical
Pre- & post-tests (handwr.), analytical, journals

Pedagogy:


  Word Processing
3-page intro. & training session, 1 eve.
3 1-hour sessions
    

  Writing
Conf. centered, wr. workshop, multiple drafts
Process
Process, university work based on reading
Process
Process, emph. revision
Process

Results:


  Improved Attitude
X
X 
 X
X

  Increased Fluency
X
    
X

  Improved Product
No
Believed improvment
No
 More subst. revision than control group
Higher scores in content, org., sent. completeness, variety







Table 1 (continued): Survey of Research on College Basic Writers
& Word Processing (1984-1990)

Study
Kirkpatrick (1987)
McAllister & Louth (1988)
Nash & Schwartz (1987)
Nichols (1986)
Posey (1986)
Rodrigues (1985)

Research Design:


  Duration
1 course
2 semesters
1 semester
2 weeks
1 course
1 semester

  Sample #
 102
24
513
12

  Method
Explor.
Exper.
Explor.
C. study

Exper.
Exper.
Explor.

Tools:


  Software
Bank Street Writer
Apple Writer
 Bank Street Writer (Old)
  
  Hardware
IBM PC
    
 
Research Participants Background
"Error-prone writer," failed CUNY Wr. Assess. York College, EOP, Queens
ACT scores 14 or less, open admissions, univ. in south
    

Writing Task
 Paragraphs, various modes, inc. personal
Short essays, similar topics
Personal desc., narrative paragraphs
  
Assessment
Informal
Pre- & post-test, holistic
Pre- & post-tests, analytical (# sent., paragraphs, etc.)
Interviews, revision, protocols, retro. self reports
Pre- & post-test (handwr.), holistic, survey, journals, interv.
Informal, journals

Pedagogy:


 Word Processing
Intro. w/some follow-up inst. in class
2 hour orient.
 Very brief intro.
  
 Writing
Process
Process, para. wr. & revising
Process, esp. revision
No wr. inst. during study
Process
Process

Results:


  Improved Attitude
X
X 
Yes/No
X
X
  Increased Fluency
X
 X
  X

  Improved Product
X
XX
X
NoNo subst. changes



 


My emphasis in this review is on learning from these studies and
building on prior research: What do we know from these studies?
What don't we know? Where are we now? Where do we go from here?
The valuable contributions of researchers can help us look ahead
and learn to use technology to greater advantage with basic writers.


Word Processing & Attitude Toward
Writing


Most researchers agree that attitude toward writing (especially
revision) noticeably improves when basic writers write with word-processing
packages. Some basic writers report enjoying writing for perhaps
the first time in their lives (Arkin and Gallagher, 1984; Rodrigues,
1985). Writing with a word-processing package makes the writing
process "more interesting and less time-consuming,"
according to the basic writers Goldsmith and Robertson (1988)
surveyed. In a study by Etchison (1989), basic writers described
writing with a word-processing package as "easier and more
satisfying." Word processing, observed Etchison, seemed "to
encourage most students to spend more time producing text as well
as working with text in ways not usually seen when basic writers
use paper and pen" (p. 36). Rodrigues (1989) and Kirkpatrick
(1987) noted increased concentration, confidence, independence,
and willingness to collaborate. The students that Arkin and Gallagher
observed (1984) similarly felt "an initial sense of achievement
and expertise" when writing with computers.

Hunter (1984) also noticed that her students had a more positive
attitude toward being placed in a basic writing course; rather
than seeing themselves misplaced or displaced, they placed themselves
in "the vanguard of technology." Furthermore, some basic
writers reported using word-processing packages for writing in
other courses as well as for personal writing (Beserra, 1986;
Hunter, 1984).

However, while word processing has the potential to help basic
writers increase their awareness of cognitive processes (Arkin
and Gallagher, 1984), studies show that when left alone, these
writers are not likely to take full advantage of computer technology
(Cross, 1990; Cullen, 1988; Hunter, 1984; Nichols, 1986). Such
findings suggest that teachers must continue to play a powerful
role in student learning (Gay, 1983, 1984).

Word Processing and the Quality of Writing
Performance


There seems to be an underlying assumption, especially in earlier
studies of basic writers and word processing, that improvement
in attitude would lead to improvement in the quality of writing.
Some basic writers believed writing with a word-processing package
improved the quality of their writing (Cross, 1990; Goldsmith
and Robertson, 1988), and although Rodrigues (1985) did not observe
substantive changes in the quality of written products, she did
believe writers in her study improved.

Results of the effects of the use of word processing on the quality
of written products, however, are contradictory. Basic writers
show some improvement in some studies (Arkin and Gallagher, 1984;
Hunter, 1984; Beserra, 1986; Cullen, 1988; Deutsch, 1988; King,
Bimbaum, and Wageman, 1984; Kirkpatrick, 1987; Nash and Schwartz,
1987; Rodrigues, 1985). In particular, they write more (and length
is often enough to cause a rater to score an essay higher). Once
they have learned the fundamentals of word processing, most basic
writers find writing easier and consequently, spend more time
writing and become relatively fluent. Like Nash and Schwartz (1987),
Etchison (1989) found that basic writers who used word-processing
packages wrote considerably more than did those students who used
pen and paper.

Other studies show mixed results, suggesting that word processing
is beneficial for improving particular features of student texts.
King, Bimbaum, and Wageman (1984), for example, found that the
experimental group had significantly higher scores in organization,
sentence completeness, and variety than the control group; but
(as Deutsch, 1988, also found) they did not make as great a gain
as the control group in English grammar and usage improvement.

Still other studies support both positions. Two studies (Nash
and Schwartz, 1987; McAllister and Louth, 1988) show significant
improvement in the quality of writing when basic writers used
word processing as a writing tool while no significant improvement
was reported in three other studies (Deming, 1987; Etchison, 1989;
Hawisher and Fortune, 1989; Posey, 1986).

Pedagogy as a Variable


Because word processing itself was the focus in most of these
studies, researchers attempted to control or reduce pedagogy as
a variable. Nichols (1986), for example, conducted his study outside
the context of the classroom. Furthermore, students received no
writing instruction during the study. Experimental researchers
(Deutsch, 1986; Etchison, 1989; McAllister and Louth, 1988) attempted
to control for potential teacher bias by asking teachers to use
the same syllabus, workbook, or reader. But we know that even
if the same teacher uses the same syllabus in two classes, the
classes (that is, the teaching and learning) are not likely to
be the same because the classroom interactions will be different.
However, Deming (1987) claimed that classroom content and procedures
were the same for both experimental and control groups taught
by the same teacher. Moreover, because writing displayed on a
monitor is more public and creates a new social context and, therefore,
a different classroom environment, it is unlikely that instruction
could be the same. Also, as Nancy Kaplan (1987) points out, instruction
tailored to print technology may not be as effective when applied
to electronic technology.

Both Nichols (1986) and Hult (1988) warned that computer use could
extend the ineffective composing habits of basic writers and that
word processing could increase their tendency to focus on surface
features rather than on overall meaning. However, Nichols's response
was based on a brief study of basic writers' initial exposure
to word processing, divorced from classroom and writing instruction,
while Hult's response was based on her observations of basic writers
in a course in-which word processing and writing instruction were
not integrated. Deming (1987) and Cross (1990) did find that basic
writers revised only at the microstructure level; both studies
were conducted in 10 weeks, and during that period participants
in Deming's study wrote three drafts of four in-class essays while
participants in Cross's study used word processing entirely on
their own after two classes of hands-on instruction.

On the other hand, Cullen (1988), Hunter (1984), and Kirkpatrick
(1987) found that basic writers who used computers for writing
in basic writing courses that emphasized revision made complex
and extensive revisions, suggesting again the critical role of
the teacher. Students, Kirkpatrick points out, "can perform
only changes [that] they are conscious are needed--the ability
to revise doesn't arise spontaneously" (p. 39) or because
a machine which eases revision is present. Similarly, Sommers
and Collins (1984) claim that studies show that computers are
helpful in classrooms "when they are used integratively,
with sound teaching methods, and that they are destructive when
used out of context, without respect for the ways students learn
to use language" (p. 14).

Although all teachers in these studies emphasized writing as a
process of revision, conceptions of writing as a process, as Lester
Faigley (1986) has observed, vary: Everyone does not teach the
same process. Although McAllister and Louth (1988), for example,
attribute significant writing improvement to the use of word processing,
Hawisher and Fortune (1989) found no significant difference in
the quality of writing by basic writers who wrote with word-processing
packages as compared with those who wrote with conventional tools.
Such dramatically different results call into question the role
of instruction (and theories of instruction) in the development
of writing abilities.

Indeed, teachers in both studies had different ideas about the
kind of work appropriate for basic writers and different conceptions
of the writing process. In keeping with the pedagogical movement
in basic writing encouraged by Bartholomae and Petrosky (1986),
Bizzell (1986), and Rose (1983), teachers in Hawisher and Fortune's
study required their students to write college-level essays based
on reading. Students in McAllister and Louth's study, on the other
hand, used computer-assisted instructional drill and practice
exercises and wrote paragraphs in a variety of modes throughout
the course. For the post-test, they were assigned to write a response
to the personal writing prompt "Nobody understands me."
In comparing such studies, information about pedagogical approaches
becomes essential for a critical reading of the reported results.

Moreover, because a number of studies show that the using word
processing often increases fluency, length, and development (Hawisher,
1989a), it is not surprising that the quality of writing is likely
to increase with the use of word processing. Increased length
and development possibly even caused raters to judge more as
better. It also should not be surprising to find that,
given the time limitation in one-course studies of 10 to 16 weeks,
the quality of what is regarded as more academic writing (a more
complex cognitive task) may not increase as a result of word processing.


Basic Writers: A Need for Definition


"[D]iscussing the computer's impact without reference to
usage, as if there could be a uniform impact, is nonsensical,"
says Olson in an article entitled "Who Computes?" (1987,
p. 185). Defining basic writers, however, is problematic (Jensen,
1986; Lunsford and Sullivan, 1990; Shaughnessy, 1976, 1977; Troyka,
1987). Shaughnessy, one of the first to attempt to characterize
basic writers, pointed out that one school's basic writer "may
be another 's regular or advanced freshman" (1976, p . 137).
In any institution, there are always going to be some students
who do not write as well as other students and who could be placed
in a basic writing course. And even within a basic writing
program, Jensen (1986) adds, "students will differ from class
to class" (p. 63). Troyka (1987) cautions us not to build
generalizations about basic writers on "local evidence"
and to recognize the social and linguistic diversity of this group.
Cullen (1988) cautions us not to "regiment our classes, but
rather recognize and respect the incalculable diversity of cognitive
and behavioral habits which [basic writers] bring to the complex
task of writing" (p. 212). I would add that we need to recognize
and respect the cultural diversity they bring to their writing
as well.

When Shaughnessy (1976,1977) wrote about basic writers, she was
careful to define what she meant. In a "Call for Articles"
for the Journal of Basic Writing, Lynn Troyka (1984) asked
authors to describe clearly for readers the student population
to which they were referring when they used the term basic
writers (1984, 4:1, facing 1). Lunsford and Sullivan (1990)
also call for basic writers to be defined in context. In the studies
I reviewed, however, little information was given about the backgrounds
of research participants generalized as basic writers.

Hunter (1984) mentioned that her students were from diverse educational
backgrounds, attending private, suburban, and small-town schools.
Basic writers in King, Birnbaum, and Wageman's (1984) study happened
to be female. Basic writers Kirkpatrick (1987) studied were mostly
minorities (Black, Hispanic, Haitian, Greek, Korean, and Chinese)
who were admitted to York College (a small four-year school in
the CUNY system) through an educational opportunity program. We
know that basic writers in McAllister and Louth's (1988) study
achieved an ACT score of 14 or below and that they attended an
open admissions university in the South. Following a breakdown
of his research population, Etchison (1989), is careful to warn:
"To make sweeping generalizations about all basic writer
populations based on this study alone would be unfair and unwise"
(p. 39).

Hawisher and Fortune (1989) specifically identify basic writers
as minority (Black and Hispanic) students from large midwestern
universities. Because gender was also a variable in that study,
they included an equal number of male and female students. While
Hawisher and Fortune did not find significant differences in writing
improvement based on gender, Hull (1988) claims that we can find
evidence that "access to and use of the new information technologies
will be differential, depending on one's sex and race and socio-economic
status" (p. 16). We need more studies of basic writers and
computers that include these variables, especially in the 1990s,
a time when more multicultural students are likely to be enrolled
in basic writing classes. Who are we talking about when we talk
about basic writers? Who are the basic writers who are using word
processing systems?

In a recently published bibliographic sourcebook of research in
basic writing, Bernhardt and Wojahn (1990) wrote about "Computers
and Writing Instruction" without focusing on basic writers
"since much of what has been written," they argue, "can
be applied equally well to both general and basic writing classes"
(p. 166). Studies of basic writers do need to be considered in
the context of studies of other writers, but we also need to build
on prior research with this (diverse) group of students placed
in basic writing classes if we want to advance our learning and
improve the teaching of basic writing. More attention needs to
be paid to defining basic writing students, not to arrive at a
monolithic description but rather to explore the diversity and
complexity of this group. How can we use computers with students
who are placed (for whatever reasons) in our basic writing classes
variously designed to help them develop their writing abilities?
How can we use computers to help basic writers take more advantage
of their placement in basic writing and perhaps move further along
the recursive developmental continuum?

Toward a New Pedagogy


Although most studies now conclude that writing instruction plays
an important role in shaping the influence of the computer, "few
studies have examined how computers affect and interact with the
cultural context or learning environment in which they are used--either
for writing or for instruction (Hawisher, 1988a, p. 5). "We
need," says Hull (1988), "to use research to learn how
we can help basic writers develop technology in such a way that
it benefits underprepared students" (p. 22).

It is not enough to talk, as we did in the 1980s, about whether
basic writers are writing in the "pen and paper condition"
or the "computer condition"--we need to know the environmental
condition. We need rich, qualitative, longitudinal studies (what
anthropologist Clifford Geertz, 1973, calls "thick description")
of basic writers computing in a variety of learning contexts,
studies like the one Herrmann (1987) conducted with motivated
high school students and Hull and Rose (Hull, 1988) are conducting
now with community college basic writing students.

We need to learn from basic writers, as DiMatteo (1990), Kremers
(1990), and Sirc and Reynolds (1990) have begun to do in a networked
classroom, so that we can develop a pedagogy that will empower
them in the academy and beyond . "We need," says Hull
( 1988), "to find ways to give [basic writers] much practice
with reading and writing, with consuming and producing texts of
value to [them], with having readers who are engaged{their] own
classmates . . . but also readers from afar" (p. 21). Rather
than focusing our attention on written products, especially textual
features, or on the writing process itself (whatever the writing
tool), Hull calls for an examination of the production and use
of texts by basic writers in the classroom context. How do basic
writers read, write, and use computers? What pedagogical changes
do we need to make to enhance their learning? What would an ideal
writing environment look like for developing writers?

Basic Writers, Computing, & Collaborative
Learning


Basic writers typically do not see themselves as writers or as
belonging to a community of writers. They are more likely to see
themselves as apart from others (who can write) and to isolate
themselves for what they perceive as failure. Some studies (Kirkpatrick,
1987; Rodrigues, 1985; Selfe and Wahlstrom, 1986) suggest that
computers can foster collaboration among writers; however, computers
alone do not encourage collaborative learning. Basic writers,
in some contexts, are isolated at workstations and as a result
may feel even less a part of the classroom community than they
would in traditional classrooms.

Research shows that, when left on their own, basic writers are
not likely to take full advantage of word processing to ease composing
and revising. They typically do not print and read drafts and
rewrite using the block move; rather, they are likely to use the
word processor as a glorified typewriter (Cross, 1990; Cullen,
1988; Hunter, 1984; Nichols, 1986; Rodrigues, 1985). The quality
of their writing could even be reduced if they use the word-processing
packages on a computer like a calculator, adding and subtracting
words without rereading when distracted in a public computer facility
by students coming and going, often interrupting their work (Gay,
1988). Basic writers need more than access to computers and more
than an introduction to the block move.

How do we get basic writers into the habit of using keyboard functions
to ease revision? How do we get them to make a block move? The
block move, though more difficult to make with basic writers who
actively resist revision, would seem relatively easy--we can integrate
word processing and writing instruction, as researchers now suggest.
This pedagogical move, however, is not easy.

We need to continue exploring how to integrate instruction. "Such
integration," Hull (1988) explains,


requires a great deal more than simply putting hardware and software
in front of students. It requires working with faculty to determine
how technology can benefit their curriculum, and it requires working
with students to determine how to introduce technology so that
it aids the writing process instead of providing one more cognitive
hurdle.... The truth is, we don't know a great deal about how
to introduce students to the new information technologies, particularly
when these students are underprepared" (pp. 21-22).


Even if we succeed, writing with a word processor, as Faigley
(1990) points out, emphasizes writing as an individual rather
than social activity.

While I advocate the integration of word processing and writing
instruction for basic writers, as they typically have not established
good composing habits, and applaud the innovative uses of individual
computers (for commentary, for example). The new technology offers
more possibilities, which may be particularly helpful for basic
writers. We need to do more than integrate instruction: We need
to change instruction--that is, if we want to take full advantage
of this new technology to maximize the development of writing
abilities.

Basic writers typically do not go through the full struggle of
articulation required to produce an effective piece of writing.
They write once through and often do not reread their writing
or talk about their ideas with anyone. They get the writing done
(and done more quickly with a word processor). If they are required
to write drafts, studies show that they tend to revise at a microstructure
level (Cross, 1990; Deming, 1987). Experienced writers, on the
other hand, reread and rethink their writing, and rewrite. They
engage in dialogue with themselves during the act of writing.
Many engage in dialogue with others about what they are writing
or thinking about; they may share their writing with others or
talk over an idea. How can we use computers to help developing
writers understand the dialogic nature of writing?

Computers can be used to enhance dialogue, that is, to provide
what Colette Daiute (1985, p. 12) calls a "conversational
context," thus "de-emphasizing the computer as a private
workspace and highlighting its potential communicative functions"
(Eldred, 1989, p. 12). Participating in small-group dialogue through
an electronic network, which tends to heighten interaction (Bump,
1990; Faigley, 1990), can help basic writers go through, or at
least begin, the struggle of articulation. Unlike the turn-taking
in oral discussion, Computer-Assisted Class Discussion (CACD)
allows everyone to talk at the same time, creating a hybrid between
oral and written discourse. Students can also review the emerging
transcript of this out-of-line discussion and leave class with
a printed copy as well. More important, this experience demonstrates
that "meaning is not fixed but socially reconstituted each
time language is used" (Faigley, 1990, p. 310), a lesson
which may be especially valuable for basic writers.

In a classroom of networked computers, basic writers can write
to each other and to their teachers and other writers in other
classes, thus breaking the boundaries of classroom walls and helping
basic writers become part of a wider network of writers. Through
electronic dialogue, basic writers can have an opportunity to
exchange ideas and information with people from different home
and academic cultures. As they write, respond, and continue with
genuine dialogue, they are more likely to become increasingly
engaged in their own learning and, in acting like writers, actually
become writers.

"Writing," as Shaughnessy (1976) pointed out, "is
a slow developing skill" (p .146). "In a few short weeks
or months, " explained Bridwell-Bowles (1989), "we cannot
'teach students to write' and test writing growth, no matter how
sophisticated our technology becomes, but we can demonstrate that
students are actively learning and that good writing is being
produced in our classrooms" (p. 84). In studies conducted
in the 1980s, writing improvement was judged by an examination
of written products. We need now to review our understanding of
writing improvement, particularly with regard to basic writers.
Sirc and Reynolds, (1990) in an exploratory study of basic writers
in a computer networked environment, realized that the kind of
behavior they wanted from their students "centered around
a traditional concept of growth in writing" and that they
had defined improvement "too narrowly" (p. 18).

Perhaps we need to think of improvement as a kind of recursive
developmental continuum, what cognitive psychologist Lev Vygotsky
(1978) refers to as the "zone of proximal development,"
that period in between what students can do today with help and
tomorrow independently. How can instructors, who play a critical
role in the development of writing abilities, help students through
this zone toward increasing independence as writers and learners?
Can computers help basic writers become independent more quickly?

Cummins (1986), in an article entitled "Empowering Minority
Students," calls for a "pattern of classroom interaction
which promotes independent learning," teaching that liberates
students from instruction by encouraging them to become "active
generators of their own knowledge" (p. 27). He advocates
what he calls a "reciprocal interaction" model of teaching
which empowers students, [1] encouraging them to assume greater
control over their own learning through collaborative activities
(p. 28). Central to this approach is the belief that "talking
and writing are a means to learning" (Bullock Report, 1975,
p. 50). Authentic student-student and student-teacher dialogue
in a collaborative learning context can encourage the development
of higher level cognitive skills. However, this new liberatory
power, as DiMatteo (1990) and Kremers (1990) have pointed out,
can also be used for what we might consider low-level (low-life?)
activity. How can we make use of computers to help basic writers
advance through the academy?

We need studies of basic writers who are learning to use language
with the computer as a communication tool and, more important,
to change our stance by asking different questions: How can we
"shape technologies to the ends we desire" (Hull, 1988,
p. 17)? How can we realize what Ohman (1985) calls the "liberatory
potential" of computers? How can we use computers to empower
developing writers? How can we use technology to help prepare
basic writers for university work? We can use computers to create
various learning contexts for developing writers and study the
process and results over time.

Studies of basic writers using computers for writing and learning
in the 1990s should continue for more than one semester long;
should include a thick description of the particular group of
basic writers in the study; should reflect a process rather than
a product view of writing improvement; and pedagogy should be
the key variable. How can we teachers introduce developing writers
to computing technology so that it aids their writing processes?
How can we integrate word processing and writing instruction?
How can we use computers to help developing writers understand
the dialogic nature of writing? How can we change instruction
so that developing writers can take advantage of the liberatory
potential of computers to maximize the development of their writing
abilities and learning?

Basic writers need more than a magic machine that eases text changes--they
need to read and write and talk about their reading and writing.
They need a reason to read and write. They need to know that what
they write is being listened to and valued (rather than
monitored). A reason to read and write is much more important
than the writing tool, argues Richard Ohman (1985). "Fancy
tools--printers and laser fonts and videos and modems and screens
with multiple windows and small storage devices with big memories--won't
matter a jot," writes Glynda Hull, "if students don't
have good reasons for writing and I reading in the first place"
(p. 21). Perhaps during this decade we can explore ways to use
computers to engage basic writers more fully in I reading and
writing. Perhaps, too, as DiMatteo (1990) suggests, we need to
"reexplore" our understanding of writing, especially
writing as a polylogic act, and think anew about language and
learning as well.

Whatever research directions we take, if we are going to advance
|basic writers, we cannot ignore the use (and misuse) of advanced
technology in the struggle for articulation. Building on prior
research through engaging basic writers as subjects rather than
objects of study can help us together learn how to shape environmental
contexts which can empower basic writers to write their way into
the future. The use of the computer as a tool in an interactive
learning environment could help basic writers speed up the learning
process and move them to the point of liberation where they can
take over their own learning and reverse their pattern of failure.


Pamela Gay teaches English at SUNY-Binghamton
in Binghamton, New York.


Note



When I talk about empowerment, I'm talking about a collaborative
learning context in which teachers help developing writers take
increasing responsibility for the development of their writing
abilities and, more broadly, their learning.



References


Arkin, M., & Gallagher, B. (1984). Word processing and the
basic writer. Connecticut English Journal, 15, 60-66.

Bartholomae, D., & Petrosky, A. R. (1986) . Facts, artifacts
and counterfacts: Theory and method for a reading and writing
course. Upper Montclair, NJ: Boynton/Cook.

Bernhardt, S., & Wohjahn, P. (1990). Computers and writing
instruction. In M. Moran & M. Jacobi (Eds.), Research in
Basic Writing (pp. 165-190). New York: Greenwood Press.

Berthoff, A. (1981). The making of meaning. Upper Montclair,
NJ: Boynton/Cook.

Beserra, W. C. (1986). Effect of word processing upon the writing
processes of basic writers (Doctoral dissertation, New Mexico
State University, 1986). Dissertation Abstracts International,
48, 34-A.

Bizzell, P. (1986). What happens when basic writers come to college?
College Composition and Communication, 37, 294-301.

Bridwell-Bowles, L. (1989). Designing research on computer-assisted
writing. Computers and Composition, 7(1), 79-90.


Bullock Report. (1975). A language for life. [Report of
the Committee of Inquiry appointed by the Secretary of State for
Education and Science under the Chairmanship of Sir Alan Bullock].
London: HMSO.

Bump, J. (1990). Radical changes in class discussion using networked
computers. Computers and the Humanities, 24, 49-65.

Cross, G. (1990). Left to their own devices: Three basic writers
using word processing. Computers and Composition, 7(2), 47-58.


Cullen, R. (1988). Computer-assisted composition: A case study
of six developmental writers. Collegiate Microcomputer, 6, 202-212.

Cummins, J. (1986). Empowering minority students: A framework
for intervention. Harvard Educational Review, 56,18-36.


Daiute, C. A. (1985). Writing and computers. Reading, MA:
Addison-Wesley.

Deming, M. P. (1987). The effects of word processing on basic
college writers' revision strategies, writing apprehension, and
writing quality while composing in the expository mode. (Doctoral
dissertation, Georgia State University, 1987). Dissertation
Abstracts International, 48, 2263-A.

DiMatteo, A. (1990). Under erasure: A theory for interactive writing
in real time. Computers and Composition, 7 (Special Issue),
71-83.

Eldred, J. M. (1989). Computers, composition pedagogy, and the
social view. In G.E. Hawisher and C. L. Selfe (Eds.), Critical
perspectives on computers and composition instructio  (pp.
201-218) . New York: Teachers College, Columbia University .

Etchison, C. (1989).Word processing: A helpful tool for basic
writers. Computers and Composition, 6(2), 33-43.


Faigley, L. (1990). Subverting the electronic workbook: Teaching
writing using networked computers. In D. Daiker and M. Morenberg
(Eds.), The writing teacher as researcher: Essays in the theory
and practice of class-based research (pp. 290-311). Portsmouth,
NH: Boynton/Cook, Heinemann.

Faigley, L. (1986). Competing theories of process: A critique
and a proposal. College English, 48, 527-542.

Gay, P. (1983). How attitude interferes with the performance
of unskilled college freshman writers. (Contract No. NIE-G-81-0102).
Washington, DC: National Institute of Education. (ERIC Document
Reproduction Service No. ED 234 41 7).

Gay, P. (1984). Sources of negative attitudes toward writing:
Case histories of five unskilled college freshman writers (Doctoral
dissertation, New York University, 1983). Dissertation Abstracts
International, 44, 3662-A.

Gay, P. (1988). A holistic approach to sentence-level errors. 
Unpublished research report. Binghamton, NY: Office of Research
and Sponsored Programs, State University of New York at Binghamton.


Geertz, C. (1973). Interpretation of cultures. New York:
Basic.

Goldsmith, M., & Robertson, A. (1988). Mitchell College:
Word processing within the freshman English curriculum. (ERIC
Document Reproduction Service No. ED 301 276). New York: Teachers
College Press.

Hawisher, G. E. (1988). Research update: Writing and word processing.
Computers and Composition, 5(2), 7-27.

Hawisher, G. E. (1989a). Computers and writing: Where's the research?
English Journal, 78, 89-91.

Hawisher, G. E. (1989b). Research and recommendations for computers
and composition. In G. E. Hawisher and C. L. Selfe (Eds.), Critical
perspectives on computers and composition instruction (pp.
44-69). New York: Teachers College, Columbia University.

Hawisher, G. E., & Fortune, R. (1989). Word processing and
the basic writer. Collegiate Microcomputer, 5, 275-287.


Herrmann, A. W. (1987). An ethnographic study of a high school
writing class using computers: Marginal, technically proficient,
and productive learners. In L. Gerrard (Ed.), Writing at century's
end: Essays on computer-assisted composition (pp. 79-91).
New York: Random House.

Hull, G. (1988). Literacy, technology, and the underprepared:
Notes toward a framework for action. The Quarterly of the National
Writing Project and the Center for the Study of Writing, 20, 1-25.


Hull, G., & Rose, M. (1989) . Rethinking remediation: Toward
a social-cognitive understanding of problematic reading and writing.
Written Communication, 6, 139-154.

Hult, C. D. (1988). The computer and the inexperienced writer.
Computers and Composition, 5(2), 29-38.

Hunter, L. (1984). Student responses to using computer text editing.
Journal of Developmental Education, 8, 13-14, 29.

Jensen, G. H. (1986). The reification of the basic writer. Journal
of Basic Writing, 5, 52-64.

Kaplan, N. (July, 1987). The technologies of teaching. Paper
presented at the Penn State conference on Rhetoric and Composition,
University Park, PA.

King, V., Birnbaum, J., & Wageman, J. (1984). Word processing
and the basic college writer. In T. Martinez (Ed.), The written
word and the word processor. Philadelphia, PA: Delaware Valley
Writing Council.

Kirkpatrick, C. (1987). Implementing computer-mediated writing:
Some early lessons. Machine-mediated Learning, 2, 35-45.


Kremers, M. (1990) . Sharing authority on a synchronous network:
The case for riding the beast. Computers and Composition, 7 (Special
Issue), 33-44.

Lunsford, A., & Sullivan, P. (1990). Who are basic writers?
In M. Moran & M. Jacobi (Eds.), Research in Basic Writing
 (pp. 17-30). New York: Greenwood Press

McAllister, C., & Louth, R. (1988). The effect of word processing
on the quality of basic writers' revisions. Research in the
Teaching of English, 22, 417-427.

Nash, J., & Schwartz, L. (1987). Computers and the writing
process. Collegiate Microcomputer, 5, 45-48.

Nichols, R. G. (1986). Word processing and basic writers. Journal
of Basic Writing, 5, 81-97.

Ohmann, R. (1985). Literacy, technology, and monopoly capital.
College English, 47, 675-689.

Olson, C. P. (1987). Who computes? In D. W. Livingstone (Ed.),
Critical pedagogy and cultural power (pp. 179-185). Critical
studies in education series. New York: Bergin & Ganey.

Posey, E. J. (1986). The writer's tool: A study of microcomputer
word processing to improve the writing of basic writers. (Doctoral
dissertation: New Mexico State University, 1986). Dissertation
Abstracts International, 48, 39-A.

Rodrigues, D. (1985). Computers and basic writers. College
Composition and Communication, 36, 336-339.

Rose, M. (1983). Remedial writing courses: A critique and a proposal.
College English, 45, 109-128.

Selfe, C. L., & Wahlstrom, B. J. (1986). An emerging rhetoric
of collaboration: Computers, collaboration, and the composing
process. Collegiate Microcomputer, 4, 289-296.

Shaughnessy, M. (1976). Basic writing. In G. Tate (Ed.), Teaching
Composition: 10 bibliographical essays (pp. 137-167). Fort
Worth, TX: Texas Christian University Press.

Shaughnessy, M. (1977). Errors and expectations: A guide for
the teacher of basic writing. New York: Oxford University
Press.

Sirc, G. S., & Reynolds, T. (1990). The face of collaboration
in the networked writing classroom. Computers and Composition,
7 (Special Issue), 53-70.

Sommers, E. A., & Collins, J. L. (1984, September). What
research tells us about composing and computing. Paper presented
at the meeting of the Computer Educators League, Buffalo, NY.


Troyka, L. Q. (1984). "Call for Articles." Journal
of Basic Writing, 4(1), facing 1.

Troyka, L. Q. (1987). Defining basic writing in context. In T.
Enos (Ed.), A sourcebook for basic writing teachers (pp.
2-15). New York: Random House

Vygotsky, L. (1978). Zone of proximal development. Mind in
society: The development of higher psychological processes
(pp. 84-91). Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.


