




Korean Program- Language Courses


AALL
- Korean - Courses
- Language Program
 
 



The Korean Language Program
 Self-Placement




KOR 001      KOR
002
KOR 063       KOR
064
KOR 125       KOR126
KOR 183       
KOR 184



Overview
The
Duke Korean program is developed on the basis of the instructional model
that emphasizes communication and content learning as effective means to
acquire language, while it also aims to work on developing students' awareness
of some crucial linguistic characteristics of Korean. From the beginning,
you will practice your new language by conversing about basic information
and simulating typical daily transactions. In the intermediate course,
you will develop interpretive and expressive abilities through the discussion
of readings and the processes of writing experiential texts. You will read
traditional folk tales and shorts texts about pre-modern Korea. The third
year course gives you an opportunity to learn more about modern and
contemporary
Korea as well as to expand your language ability. You will read, research
and discuss about the turbulent transitions in Korean history; from monarchy
to democracy, from agricultural to modern industrial society.
We accommodate students coming from various backgrounds and experience
levels. Students with prior learning experience at home and in college
are encouraged to get a jump start with the second year course, thereby
achieving a higher level of language ability. The first year course is
designed to allow absolute beginners to receive appropriately paced instruction
in basic language use and foundational grammar. 
 


KOR 001 Elementary Korean-I 
syllabus Self-Pl
acement
This course is for students who have no prior knowledge of Korean or
have minimal proficiency in Korean. The course focuses on: 
                   
1.developing oral and aural proficiency for survival
                     
communication; 
                   
2.mastery of the Korean writing system for rudimentary reading
                     
and writing; 
                   
3.learning foundational grammar for simple sentence building. 
Class sessions utilize oral communication practices through information
gap activities, role plays, and listening comprehension exercises. Outside
class, students complete worksheets to review new materials and to practice
reading and writing in Hangul (Korean script). 
back to top


KOR 002 Elementary Korean-II 
syllabus  Self-Pl
acement
This course is the continuation of 001. It can also be taken by students
who have some basic prior knowledge of Korean and can write and speak in
simple sentences.The course focuses on: 
                   
1.attaining oral and aural fluency to function in daily communication
                      
situations; 
                   
2.developing reading and writing skills for functional literacy; 
                   
3.learning foundational grammar for complex sentence building. 
Class sessions are devoted to learning new structures and doing listening
comprehension and interactive activities to practice the new structures
in communicative contexts. For readings, authentic but accessible texts
such as Aesop's fables in Korean translation are used. Assignments to be
done outside class include composition of paragraph-length writing as well
as grammar exercises. 
back to top


KOR 063 Intermediate Korean I 
syllabus Self-Pl
acement
This course is the continuation of KOR 001/002 sequence. It can also
be taken by students entering with knowledge of the Korean writing system
and oral profiency to take part in typical daily interactions. The course
focuses on developing and enriching literacy skills in Korean, especially
abilities for: 
                   
1.reading narrative and descriptive texts; 
                   
2.writing narrative and descriptive texts of one-to-two page lengths; 
                   
3.conversing fluently and appropriately on everyday topics in
                      
different situations; 
                   
4.gaining analytical knowledge of the structure of the Korean
                      
language. 
The course draws on various narrative texts as well as descriptions
of traditional Korean games, newspaper headlines and captions, songs and
TV commercials for integrated practices of reading, writing, speaking and
listening skills. Students will develop their expressive abilities through
the process of writing--drafting, revising, and editing. More controlled
but fun exercises are also provided to develop students' control of
grammar. 
back to top


KOR 064 Intermediate Korean II
syllabus  Self-PlacementThis cours
e is the continuation of KOR 063, and focuses on improving
skills for: 
                   
1.reading expository texts and extended narratives; 
                   
2.writing descriptive and informative texts; 
                   
3.verbal communication on a range of topics; 
                   
4.expanding analytical knowledge of the structure of the Korean
                     
language. 
In addition to integrated practices of comprehension and production
skills, the course provides opppotunity to learn about Korean history upto
the modern times. Readings are selected from books written for middle school
Korean students about historical figures, and lecturettes are given about
the life and custom of pre-modern periods. Students will continue to write
on assigned topics to expand their expressive abilities. Some class time
will be devoted to working on students' control of grammar.
back to top


KOR 125 Advanced Korean I
syllabus Self-Pl
acement
This course is the continuation of the intermediate Korean sequence
(KOR 063/064). It can also be taken by students entering with sufficient
proficiency in spoken and written Korean. The goal of the course is to
develop skills in these areas: 
                   
1.reading authentic texts written for mature audiences; 
                   
2.writing expository or argumentative essays; 
                   
3.participating in public discourse; 
                   
4.communicating with greater accuracy and grammatical complexity. 
Readings are selected from magazinss, newspapers and books on topics
ranging from food to education to gender issues. Students are encouraged
to engage in interpretive and critical reading of the texts. They write
and give oral presentations on topics or issues
related to the readings. Part of class meetings is spent on practicing
chosen parts of the grammar book. 
back to top


KOR 126 Advanced Korean II
syllabus  Self-Pl
acement
This course is also a continuation of the intermediate Korean sequence
(KOR 063/064). It can be taken without taking KOR 125  with a permission
from the instructor. The course will focus on:
                   
1.advancing reading and writing skills; 
                   
2.learning the social and historical background necessary to
                      
understand contemporary Korean; 
                   
3.learning basic Chinese characters and developing knowledge of
                      
Sino-Korean vocabulary. 
Major readings include two Pansori novels from classic Korean folk
literature:
"Shimchung," on parent-child relationship, and "Choonhyang" on romantic
love. Readings and discussion of Korean history concern the colonial period
under the Japanese rule, and the industrialization and democratization
of the modern Korean nation. Some basic Chinese characters are taught to
help students construct a conceptual basis of Sino-Korean vocabulary that
constitutes 70% of Korean vocabulary.
back to top


KOR 183 Topics in Korean I
subject to funding from the Korea Research Foundation.
Self-Pl
acement
This course is a continuation of the advanced Korean sequence (KOR 125/126).
It focuses on developing students' interpretive and expressive abilities
through reading and discussions of essays, short stories, and newspaper
articles. The course is taught in Korean by a visiting professor from
Korea. 
back to top


KOR 184 Topics in Korean II
subject to funding from the Korea Research Foundation.
Self-Pl
acement
This course is the continuation of KOR 183. It continues to work on
developing students' interpretive and expressive abilities through reading
and discussions of essays, short stories, and newspaper articles. The course
is taught in Korean by a visiting professor from Korea. 
back to top


 

welcome
| major
& minor | languages
| aall
courses | study
abroad | faculty
& staff

Back
to AALL
Duke
Home


