


Islamic History, Philosophy, and Scientific Thought



 


 

Islamic Philosophy, Scientific
Thought, and History
NOTE:  To view the full Encyclopaedia Britannica articles noted on this page one must be
a paid subscriber or access the articles through a library that has a subscription.

Table of Contents
General Essays
Islamic Philosophy
Islam and Science
History of Islam
General Essays
Islamic Scientists
and Philsophers A variety of introductory  articles on Muslim
scientists and philosophers before the European Renaissance, written by 
Dr. A. Zahoor.

Islamic Philosophy
Islamic Philosophy Website This
website has a large number of high quality online books and articles dealing with the
major Islamic philosophers and their ideas. Unquestionably the best source for Islamic
philosophy on the web.
 (November 6, 2001.)

Dictionary of Islamic
Philosophical Terms
 (November 6, 2001.)

Major Points in
Islamic Philosophy, written by an American non-Muslim teacher of
Philosophy, Wallace Provost, this article deals with a few of the
issues that Muslim philosophers were concerned with. (Fixed Feb. 5, 1999)

Al-Kindi
(d. 873 CE)
was an important Muslim mathematician and philosopher.
 
Background 
and scope of philosophical interest in Islam and the Teachings of al-Kindi 
 (d. 870), from the Encyclopaedia Britannica, discusses the
philosophical milieu out of which Islamic philosophy arose and then
outlines the main philosophical positions held by Ya'qub ibn
Is'haq al-Kindi.

The
Teachings of Abu Bakr ar-Razi (d. 10th century AD), from the
Encyclopaedia Britannica, outlines the main points of al-Razi's philosophy,
a philosophy that in part was influenced by the Mu'tazilites.  Razi, in
general, was critical of religion and rejected prophecy.  

The
Teachings of al-Farabi, an
article from the Encyclopaedia Britannica, covers a number of
significant aspects of the philosophy of Abu al-Nasr al-Farabi (d. circa
950 AD), among them being the
following: political philosophy and the
study of religion, his interpretation of Plato and Aristotle, the
analogical relationship between religion and philosophy, and the impact of
al-Farabi on Isma'ili theology.
 Avicenna
(980-1037) (as
he is known in the West, while his actual
name was Abu 'Ali Sina) is the title of a substantial entry in the
Catholic Encyclopedia devoted to
one of the greatest Muslim philosophers.

Al-Ghazali,
Causality, and Knowledge by Peter Adamson, of the University of Notre
Dame. This paper is among the papers included in the Paideia Project
On-Line, which archives the papers presented at the Twentieth World
Congress of Philosophy, held in Boston, Mass., U.S.A., August, 1998.

Abu Hamid al-Ghazali (d.
1111 CE) is a scholarly article by Massimo Campanini from the History of Islamic
Philosophy.  Al-Ghazali was deeply erudite philosopher, theologian, scholar of law,
and a mystic (Sufi).
 
Ibn
Rushd's On the Harmony of Religion and Philosophy  This is a
translation of part of Ibn Rushd's (Averroes)(1126-1198 CE) Kitab fasl
al-maqal. In it the
following problems are discussed: the creation of the universe, the advent
of prophets, fate and predestination, divine justice and injustice, and
the Day of Judgment.
 
Ibn
Rushd, known in the West as Averroes. This article
about him was taken from the Encyclopaedia Britannica. (Offline as of
April 17, 2000)

Averroes the
article on Ibn Rushd in the Catholic Encyclopedia. 


Ibn Rushd, by
Dr. A. Zahoor.
Islam and Science
Islam and Modern Science is the title of a lecture delivered at MIT by
the eminent Muslim scholar, Seyyed Hossein Nasr.

Comprehensive
Links for Islamic Law and Ethics, paying particular
attention to medical ethics.  Annotated at the library of the School of Nursing at the
Higher Colleges of Technology (HCT) in the
United Arab Emirates.

Islamic Medicine
Edited by Shahid Athar, M.D., a Muslim physician and scholar, this is a
collection of highly informative essays by a variety of physicians and
scholars.  Of particular interest to scholars are the chapters from the
9th century CE. text Adab al-Tabib, by
al-Ruhawi, translated by Martin Levey in the journal Transactions of
the American Philosophical Society,
Vol. 57, Part 3, 1967, as "Medical Ethics of Medieval Islam with Special
Reference to Al-Ruhawi's Practical Ethics of the Physician." One chapter
from Adab al-Tabib is Statement on the
Procedures and
Policies by which the Physician Must Conduct Himself in His Daily
Life; additional chapters include topics such as edible matter,
beverages, sleeping and being awake, psychic
events; and habits. (Back on-line 4/27/98)
Another chapter in the book Islamic Medicine is Islamic
Medical
Ethics.  This chapter, written by Shahid Athar (the editor of the
volume), comprises discussions of the Islamic perspective on various
contemporary medical issues such as 'the right to live and die'
(including euthanasia), 'organ transplants,' 'abortion,' 'bio-technical 
reproduction' (surrogate motherhood), and 'AIDS.' (Back on-line
4/27/98)


Sex Education: An Islamic
Perspective is an on-line book edited by the Muslim physician, Shahid
Athar.  Most of the articles in the book were written by Dr. Athar.  Among
its contents are the following articles: "Sex Education, Teenage
Pregnancy, Sex In Islam And Marriage," 
"Role Of The Muslim Physician In Sex Education," "Sex Roles In Muslim
Families In The U.S," "Gender Relations Attitude - Survey Of Muslim Youth
And Parents," "Sex Education Questions From Muslim Youth," "Candid Talk,"
and "A Case Against Pornography."

Extensive
Annotated Links on Islam and Medicine compiled at the Higher
Colleges of Technology health sciences and nursing library, The United Arab Emirates.
Islamic History
Historically
Related Maps of the Muslim World Collected by Prof. Von Schlegell at
the University of Pennsylvania, this is the best collection of its kind on
the web. (Link fixed, November 12, 2001.)

The History of Islam
by Professor John Voll of Georgetown University. Originally a ten page article published in
the Encyclopedia
of Politics and Religion, ed. Robert Wuthnow; then put online by Congressional
Quarterly, Inc.
 

The
Religion of Islam, consisting of an overview of its basic principles
and early history, written by the Islamic scholars at
ISL software. 
A Brief History of Islam Written by the Islamic
scholars of ISL software, this history briefly surveys the major dynasties
of the Muslim world.

Islam and Islamic
History in Arabia and the Middle East This is a well-written survey
in some detail (more than the previous link) and organized according to
dynasty.

The
Islamic World to 1600, an on-line book  developed by the Department of
History at the University
of Calgary, is a well-done but largely political history of the Muslim
world
until 1600. 


Early
Islamic History, major events from the birth of the Prophet to 1492.

A Brief
Chronology of Muslim History
Although there is much more to Islamic history than military and political
history, these are the histories that have tended to capture people's
attention, rather than cultural history. Hence, this particular link
deals
almost entirely with military and political history from the 6th to the
20th century.


The Abbasid Construction of the Jahiliyya: Cultural Authority
in the Making, by Rina Drory, of the Department of Arabic and Unit for
Culture Research of Tel Aviv University.  This article was published in
the scholarly journal Studia Islamica, 1996/1 (February), pp.
38-49. 
 History
of Islam During the Lifetime of the Prophet and the Rightly Guided
Caliphs
Map of Arabia
During the Advent of Islam
Companions of the
Prophet is an alphabetical listing of biographies of a number of "companions" (sahaba) of the Prophet, namely those
who physically saw him and were believers during his lifetime. These
particular biographies come from two Islamic contemporary sources: the
book, Companions of the Prophet, by Abdul Wahid Hamid and the
 Islamic database, Alim Online.  In particular, see the biographies of the
following companions:
Abdullah
Ibn Mas'ud

'Abd 
al-Rahman Ibn Awf

Abu
Dharr al-Ghifari

Abu
Musa al-Ash'ari

Abu
Hurayrah

Abu
al-Darda

'A'ishah
bint Abi Bakr

Asma
bint Abi Bakr

Mu'adh
ibn Jabal

Sa'd
ibn Abi Waqqas

Salman
al-Farsi
New Light
on the Story of Banu Qurayza and the Jews of Medina This article,
written by W. N. Arafat and published in 1976 in
the scholarly Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain and
Ireland, refutes the validity of the Muslim story of the massacre of
the Banu Qurayza, a Jewish tribe of Medina. 
 The
Rightly-Guided Caliphs The four "rightly-guided" caliphs were the
first four leaders of Islam to succeed the Prophet Muhammad in his role as
head of the Islamic community. This concise overview was written by the
National Muslim Student Association of the USA and Canada.

History of the Islam in the Middle East after the Rightly Guided
Caliphs
Civil War and the
Umayyads, written by Richard Hooker, is a political history
that begins with the death of the Prophet and covers both the period of
the Rightly Guided Caliphs (632-661 CE) and that of the Ummayad Dynasty
(661-750 CE).

The Abbasid
Dynasty, a political history written by Richard Hooker, covers the
dynasty that ruled the
Middle East during the years 750 to 1258 CE. 


A History of Aleppo and Damascus in the Early Middle Ages, 635-1260
C.E., a lecture at the University of Kyoto by Professor. R. Stephen
Humphreys. (Fixed 10.1.98)

History of Islam in East, Central, South, and Southeast Asia

Contested
Borders in the Caucasus is an on-line book edited by
Professor Bruno Coppieters and consisting of
essays by various scholars dealing with the recent
political history of the Caucasus. Most significant for students of modern
Islamic history are chapter six, Russia,
Iran and Azerbaijan: The Historic Origins of Iranian Foreign Policy,
chapter seven, Iran's
Role as Mediator in the Nagorno-Karabakh Crisis, and
chapter eight, Turkey's
Policies in Transcaucasia.

The Origins of the
Kazaks and Uzbeks is an article by
the eminent historian Zeki Velidi Togan and translated by H. B. Paksoy. 
 
Islam in China
briefly discusses the history of Chinese Islam from 650 CE to 1980 CE.

Concise
History of Islam in India (711-1775 CE) written by the Pakistani
Student Association at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute.
 
Islam in Peninsular
Malaysia, gives an overview of the origins of Malaysian Islam, its
spread, and the effects of European colonization.
History of Islam in Africa
Islam
in
Africa  In this article,
Professor 'Abdur
Rahman Doi of Ahmadu Bello University in Nigeria discusses the
early history of
Islam in Africa, from the year 615 CE until the early eighth century CE.

The
Spread
of Islam in West Africa In this article,  
Professor 'Abdur
Rahman Doi begins with the
8th Century CE and discusses the history of Islam in the ancient empires
of Western Sudan: Ghana, Mali, Songhay, Kanem-Bornu, and Hausa-Fulani
land. 
 Africa and Islamic Revival: Historical and
Contemporary Perspectives is the text of a lecture delivered by John
Hunwick, one of the chief scholars of African Islam.

The
Islamicization of the Hara Plateau and Its Muslim Shrines This
article, by the scholar Ulrich Braukamper, discusses an important chapter
in the history of Islam in the Ethiopian-Somali "Horn of Africa."
(Fixed as of 10/1/98) 
Discussion
of African Islamic History  This link consists of
correspondence between a number of scholars of Africa concerning materials
for the teaching of Islam in Africa.
The Academic Study of Islamic History
The
Middle East in the 20th Century Stanford University professor Joel
Benin's class site. It includes a syllabus, lecture notes, images,
historical documents, and maps.
 Comprehensive Islamic History
Sites
 Studies of Countries with Significant
Muslim Populations, researched by the U.S. Library of Congress as part
of its Area Studies on-line handbook. These multi-dimensional studies 
often contain very useful historical surveys of the country in question. 

Encyclopaedia of the
Orient is a well-designed and useful reference covering mainly the
Middle East and North Africa.
Internet
Islamic History Sourcebook created by Prof. Paul Halsall of Fordham
University. A wide-ranging site emphasizing concerns of
modernist and late-modernist historians. It is especially
noteworthy for the large
amount of scanned English texts published before 1923 (and therefore
copyright
free).
  World
History Textbook Review  This link consists of critical reviews
written by scholars of the Middle East Studies Association (MESA)
concerning various Middle East and World History textbooks.  The reviews
focus on the treatment of Islam and the Middle East in these textbooks.
  
Converting Between
Islamic and Western Dates  In Islamic texts dates are written using a
lunar calendar beginning with the hijra (the emmigration or flight)
of the Prophet Muhammad from Mecca to Medina. This is called the Hijri
calendar and is designated by the abbreviation AH, in contrast to the
Western solar calendar currently used in academia in the United States,
which refers to the era beginning with the birth of Jesus as the Common
Era and which is abbreviated by CE. The reason why a calculation beyond
simple addition or subtraction must be made in order to determine the CE
date if one knows the AH date (and vice versa) is because the lunar year
is ten or eleven days less than the solar year.  While the lunar
Hijri calendar is used in the Sunni and pre-modern Iranian Shi'i world, 
Modern Iran uses a solar Hijri calendar that is 621 years less
than the Western solar calendar. Converting between these two calendars is
simply a matter of subtracting 621 from a CE date or adding 621 to a solar
Hijri date.  Nevertheless, converting between the lunar Hijri calendar and
the solar Western calendar requires a somewhat more complicated
calculation.  Hence we have provided this link, which performs the
required calculation.  Readers interested in more information about the
Islamic calendar should consult the article entitled "Islamic Calendar" in
the Oxford Encyclopedia of the Modern Islamic World.



 

 
Return Home


